Subagents and Orchestration

A subagent is a specialized AI Agent with its own instructions and isolated context window. Each subagent is an expert at one type of task.

Think of Claude Code as a project manager with a team of specialists:

Claude Code (main): Coordinates overall work
Plan subagent: Researches your codebase and creates multi-step plans
Custom subagents: You can create specialists for your team's specific needs (content planning, research synthesis, document structuring, etc.)

You already have a team of AI specialists. Let's meet them.

You Already Have a Team​

Run this command in Claude Code right now:

/agents


What you'll see:

│ Agents                                                                               │
│ ❯ Create new agent                                                                   │
│                                                                                      │
│   Built-in agents (always available)                                                 │
│   Bash · inherit                                                                     │
│   general-purpose · inherit                                                          │
│   statusline-setup · inherit                                                         │
│   Explore · haiku                                                                    │
│   Plan · inherit                                                                     │
│   claude-code-guide · haiku                                                          │


These are subagents:specialized AI assistants that Claude Code can delegate work to. Each has its own expertise and isolated context window.

You don't need to create anything yet. You already have a team ready to work.

Try It Now: Your First Subagent​

Let's use the Explore subagent to see what's in your current folder.

Type this in Claude Code:

Use the Explore subagent to tell me what's in this folder and summarize the project structure.


What happens:

Claude Code delegates to the Explore subagent
Explore scans your directory with its own clean context
Explore returns a summary to main Claude Code
You see the results

Try it! This is hands-on learning: run it now and see what Explore finds.

Meet the Built-In Agents​
Agent	Best For	Model
Explore	Finding files, searching code, understanding codebase structure	Haiku (fast)
Plan	Complex multi-step tasks, creating implementation strategies	Sonnet (smart)
general-purpose	Multi-step tasks requiring various tools	Inherits current
Bash	Command execution tasks	Inherits current
claude-code-guide	Questions about Claude Code itself	Haiku

Key insight: Claude Code automatically picks the right specialist based on your request. But you can also explicitly invoke any agent.

How Subagents Work?​

Critical concept: A subagent is invoked once for a specific goal, completes its work, and returns results to main Claude Code.

The flow:

Main Claude Code recognizes a task that needs a specialist
Launches the subagent with a specific goal
Subagent works independently in isolated context
Subagent completes its task and returns results
Control returns to main Claude Code
You interact with main Claude Code to proceed

Think of it like this: You send a specialist to research something. They go off, do their work, come back with a report, and then you continue the conversation with your main assistant.

Automatic Delegation​

You don't command "use the Plan subagent." Claude Code decides when to delegate based on:

Task complexity (multi-step tasks trigger Plan)
Your request type (code review request might trigger a review subagent if you have one)
Subagent descriptions (Claude matches task to specialist)
Parallel Power: Multiple Agents at Once​

Here's where it gets powerful. You can invoke multiple subagents in a single prompt.

Try this:

Use Explore to show me what files are in this project, AND use Plan to outline how I could add a README if one doesn't exist.


What happens:

Claude Code launches both subagents
They work in parallel with isolated contexts
Results combine into a single response

Real-world example:

Use Explore to find all test files in this project, AND use Plan to suggest a testing strategy for the gaps you find.


This is orchestration:coordinating multiple specialists toward a goal.

Why Subagents Work: Clean Context​

Each subagent has its own isolated context window. Why does this matter?

Without subagents (one AI doing everything):

You ask Claude to research competitors
Context fills with research notes
You ask Claude to draft a pitch
Context is cluttered: Claude might confuse research notes with your pitch

With subagents:

Research subagent does research, returns clean summary
Main Claude receives summary, context stays clean
Planning subagent drafts pitch with fresh context
Each specialist focuses on one job

Think of it like a team meeting: The researcher presents findings, then leaves. The strategist creates a plan with fresh focus. Nobody is juggling everything at once.

💬 AI Colearning Prompt​

"Explain why subagents use isolated context windows instead of sharing the main conversation. What problems does context isolation solve?"

The Execution Model​

How subagents work:

You → Main Claude Code → Launches Subagent → Subagent works → Returns results → Main Claude Code → You


Key concepts:

One task, one completion: Subagent is invoked for a specific goal, completes it, returns
Control returns: After the subagent finishes, you interact with main Claude Code again
Automatic or explicit: Claude Code can auto-delegate, or you can request a specific agent

Automatic triggers:

Ask "What files handle authentication?" → Explore auto-activates
Ask "Help me add user login to this app" → Plan auto-activates (complex task)

Explicit invocation:

Use the Plan subagent to analyze this feature request.


@-mention invocation: Type @ in the chat and pick a subagent from the typeahead menu. This guarantees that specific subagent runs, rather than relying on Claude to match your request automatically.

Hands-On: Create Your First Custom Subagent​

Now that you've used built-in agents, let's create your own specialist.

Step 1: Open the Agent Menu​
/agents


Select "Create new agent"

Step 2: Choose Location​
│ Choose location                                                               │
│ ❯ 1. Project (.claude/agents/)                                                │
│   2. Personal (~/.claude/agents/)                                             │


Choose 1 (Project): makes the agent available in this project only.

Step 3: Choose Creation Method​
│ Creation method                                                               │
│ ❯ 1. Generate with Claude (recommended)                                       │
│   2. Manual configuration                                                     │


Choose 1:let Claude generate the agent from your description.

Step 4: Describe Your Agent​

Type something like:

Help me review code for bugs and suggest improvements.
Use when I say "review this code" or "check for bugs."


Claude Code creates:

Agent name (e.g., code-reviewer)
Instructions based on your description
Tool permissions
Saves to .claude/agents/code-reviewer.md
Step 5: Test It​
Use the code-reviewer subagent to review this function: [paste your code]


You just created a reusable specialist.

Where Subagents Live​

Project-level: .claude/agents/ (this project only) User-level: ~/.claude/agents/ (all your projects)

Example file (.claude/agents/code-reviewer.md):

---
name: code-reviewer
description: Reviews code for bugs and suggests improvements
model: sonnet
---

# Code Review Instructions

When reviewing code:

1. Check for bugs and edge cases
2. Suggest performance improvements
3. Note any security concerns
4. Recommend cleaner patterns


The model field accepts: sonnet, opus, haiku, a full model ID (e.g., claude-sonnet-4-6), or inherit to use whatever model the main conversation is using. When omitted, subagents inherit the current model by default.

More Subagent Ideas​

Once you understand the pattern, create specialists for any repeated task:

Research subagent: Deep-dive into documentation, gather requirements
Testing subagent: Generate test cases, identify edge cases
Documentation subagent: Write README files, API docs, architecture notes
Refactor subagent: Suggest cleaner code patterns, reduce complexity

The pattern:

What expertise does this specialist have?
What should it do autonomously?
What format should results be in?
PERSISTENT MEMORY FOR SUBAGENTS

Subagents can retain knowledge across conversations using the memory field in their frontmatter (e.g., memory: project). This gives the subagent a dedicated memory directory that survives between sessions, so a research subagent can build on previous findings rather than starting from scratch every time.

Skills vs. Subagents: Decision Criteria​

Now that you understand both skills (Lesson 08) and subagents, when do you choose one over the other?

Factor	Choose Skill	Choose Subagent
Invocation	Automatic OR explicit by name	Explicit only (you invoke)
Context	Shared with main conversation	Isolated context window
Complexity	Lightweight, single-focus	Multi-step, complex workflows
Guarantee	Flexible (auto-triggers or invoke by name)	Hard invocation (always runs)
Best for	Repeated patterns, formatting, procedures	Audits, refactoring, comprehensive analysis

Use skill when: "I want Claude to automatically do this whenever it's relevant."

Use subagent when: "I need guaranteed execution with isolated context for this complex task."

Examples​

Skill appropriate:

Meeting notes formatting (happens often, simple procedure)
Blog post planning (repeated task, consistent structure)
Code comment style (automatic enforcement)

Subagent appropriate:

Comprehensive security audit (complex, needs isolation)
Multi-file refactoring (guaranteed execution required)
Full codebase analysis (too large for skill context)
What's Next​

Subagents are one-shot workers that report back to the caller. But what happens when workers need to talk to each other? In Chapter 15, Lesson 9, you'll learn about Agent Teams:multiple Claude Code instances that communicate directly, share a task list, and self-coordinate. Same context isolation principles, but with inter-agent collaboration.

Lesson 12 introduces MCP Integration:connecting Claude to external systems like web browsers, databases, and documentation servers. Where subagents give you coordination between AI specialists, MCP gives you access to the outside world.

READY TO PRACTICE?

Head to Lesson 10: Agent Skills Exercises for 27 hands-on exercises covering skill composition, real-world skill building, and capstone projects; with one-click exercise downloads and step-by-step guidance.

Try With AI​

🔍 Explore Your Codebase:

"Use the Explore subagent to find all configuration files in this project. Then explain what each one does."

What you're learning: How the Explore subagent does research autonomously: it reads files, follows imports, and reports findings without manual guidance.

📋 Plan a Feature:

"Use the Plan subagent to create an implementation plan for adding dark mode to a React application. Include phases, dependencies, and testing strategy."

What you're learning: How Plan Mode creates comprehensive strategies before execution. This pattern: plan first, execute second: produces better outcomes than iterative guessing.

⚡ Parallel Agents:

"Use Explore to find all API routes in this project, AND use Plan to suggest how to add authentication to routes that don't have it."

What you're learning: Parallel agent execution: running multiple specialists simultaneously. This pattern appears in production workflows where throughput matters.

🛠️ Create a Custom Agent:

"Walk me through creating a custom subagent for [your repeated task: code reviews, blog planning, meeting notes, test design]. Help me think through: What should it do? What questions should it ask? What format should output be?"

What you're learning: The subagent design process: from identifying a need to defining behavior. Custom subagents are your first step toward building specialized AI teams.

🎯 Orchestrate Multiple Agents:

"I need to understand this unfamiliar codebase. Use Explore to map the project structure, AND use Plan to create a learning path for understanding the architecture. Show me how the results combine."

Flashcards Study Aid​
