Scheduled Tasks: The Loop Skill and Cron Tools

You kick off a 45-minute database migration. The terminal is running, Claude is idle, and you need to know when it finishes -- but you also need to keep working on something else. Without scheduled tasks, you alt-tab every few minutes to check progress. With one line, you hand that job to Claude:

/loop 5m check if the migration finished and tell me what happened


Claude sets up a recurring check that fires every 5 minutes in the background. You keep working. When the migration completes, Claude tells you -- no manual polling, no context switching.

In Lesson 15, you learned hooks: code that reacts to events Claude triggers. Scheduled tasks flip the relationship. Instead of waiting for an event, you create events on a timer. Hooks are reactive; scheduled tasks are proactive.

The /loop Skill​

The /loop bundled skill is the quickest way to schedule a recurring prompt. Pass an optional interval and a prompt:

/loop 5m check if the deployment finished and tell me what happened


Claude parses the interval, converts it to a cron expression, schedules the job, and confirms the cadence and job ID. From that point, the prompt fires automatically at the specified interval while the session stays open.

Interval Syntax​

Intervals are flexible. You can lead with them, trail with them, or leave them out entirely:

Form	Example	Parsed interval
Leading token	/loop 30m check the build	every 30 minutes
Trailing every clause	/loop check the build every 2 hours	every 2 hours
No interval	/loop check the build	defaults to every 10 minutes

Supported units: s (seconds), m (minutes), h (hours), d (days). One caveat: seconds are rounded up to the nearest minute because the underlying cron system has one-minute granularity. If you type /loop 30s check the logs, it fires every minute, not every 30 seconds.

Intervals that do not divide evenly into their unit, like 7m or 90m, are rounded to the nearest clean interval. Claude tells you what it picked.

Composing with Commands​

The scheduled prompt can itself be a slash command or skill invocation. This is useful for re-running a workflow you have already packaged:

/loop 20m /review-pr 1234


Each time the job fires, Claude runs /review-pr 1234 as if you had typed it. Any skill or command that works when you type it manually works inside a /loop.

One-Time Reminders​

Not everything needs to repeat. For one-shot reminders, describe what you want in natural language:

remind me at 3pm to push the release branch

in 45 minutes, check whether the integration tests passed


Claude pins the fire time to a specific minute and hour using a cron expression, confirms when it will fire, and the task deletes itself after running once.

All times are interpreted in your local timezone. "3pm" means 3pm wherever you are running Claude Code, not UTC.

Jitter Near Round Times​

One-shot tasks scheduled for the top or bottom of the hour (:00 or :30) fire up to 90 seconds early. This jitter prevents every session from hitting the API at the same wall-clock moment. If exact timing matters, pick a minute that is not :00 or :30 -- for example, remind me at 3:07pm avoids the jitter entirely.

Under the Hood: CronCreate, CronList, CronDelete​

The /loop skill is a convenience layer. Under the hood, Claude calls three tools that you can also reference directly:

Tool	Purpose
CronCreate	Schedule a new task. Accepts a 5-field cron expression, the prompt to run, and recurrence mode.
CronList	List all scheduled tasks with their IDs, schedules, and prompts.
CronDelete	Cancel a task by ID.

Each scheduled task gets an 8-character ID. To see what is running:

what scheduled tasks do I have?


Claude calls CronList and shows the task IDs, their schedules, and the prompts they run. To cancel one:

cancel the deploy check job


Claude matches your description to a task ID and calls CronDelete. You can also reference the ID directly if you know it.

CronCreate accepts standard 5-field cron expressions (minute hour day-of-month month day-of-week). All fields support wildcards (*), single values (5), steps (*/15), ranges (1-5), and comma-separated lists (1,15,30). You rarely need to write cron expressions yourself -- /loop handles the conversion -- but the power is there when you want precise control:

Expression	Meaning
*/5 * * * *	Every 5 minutes
0 * * * *	Every hour on the hour
0 9 * * *	Every day at 9am local
0 9 * * 1-5	Weekdays at 9am local
Session Scope and Limits​

Scheduled tasks are deliberately session-scoped. Understanding what that means -- and what it does not mean -- prevents every common frustration:

Scheduled Tasks ARE	Scheduled Tasks ARE NOT
Session-scoped: live in the current process	Persistent: do not survive exit or restart
Fire between turns, when Claude is idle	Mid-response: do not interrupt active work
Limited to 50 tasks per session	Unlimited: the 50-task cap is a safety bound
Subject to 3-day expiry for recurring tasks	Indefinite: forgotten loops auto-clean themselves
Local timezone for all time expressions	UTC-based
Affected by jitter (up to 10% of period)	Exactly on time to the second
No Catch-Up for Missed Fires​

If Claude is busy on a long-running request when a task comes due, the prompt fires once when Claude becomes idle -- not once per missed interval. There is no backlog. If an hourly check misses three hours because Claude was working, you get one check when it finishes, not three.

The 3-Day Expiry​

Recurring tasks automatically expire 3 days after creation. The task fires one final time, then deletes itself. This bounds how long a forgotten loop can run. If you need a recurring task to last longer, cancel and recreate it before it expires.

Disabling the Scheduler​

Set CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_CRON=1 in your environment to disable the scheduler entirely. The cron tools and /loop become unavailable, and any already-scheduled tasks stop firing. This is useful in CI environments or shared servers where background scheduling is undesirable.

Power Combos​
/loop + Remote Control (Lesson 23)​

Start a Remote Control session, schedule a recurring check, then monitor from your phone:

# In tmux for persistence
tmux new -s deploy-watch
claude remote-control


Inside the session:

/loop 10m check the deployment status and summarize any errors


Now scan the QR code with your phone. Every 10 minutes, Claude checks the deployment and you see the results on your phone -- no laptop needed.

/loop + Agent Teams (Lesson 20)​

Schedule a recurring task that coordinates with agent teams. A parent agent can use /loop to periodically check on long-running subagent work:

/loop 15m check if any subagent tasks have completed and summarize their results

For Durable Scheduling​

When tasks need to survive restarts, session-scoped scheduling is the wrong tool. Claude Code now offers a spectrum of scheduling options:

Tier	Method	Runs Where	Survives Restart?	Machine Required?
Cloud	Cloud Scheduled Tasks	Anthropic infrastructure	Yes	No
Desktop	Desktop scheduled tasks	Your local machine	Yes (while app is open)	Yes
Session	/loop	Current Claude Code process	No	Yes

Cloud Scheduled Tasks run on Anthropic's infrastructure, so they persist across restarts and execute even when your machine is off. Create and manage them with the /schedule command:

/schedule every weekday at 9am: check the CI dashboard and summarize any failures


You can also manage cloud tasks through the Claude.ai web interface at Settings > Scheduled Tasks. Cloud tasks require a Pro or Max plan.

Desktop scheduled tasks use Claude Desktop's graphical scheduling for recurring workflows. Your machine must be on with the Desktop app running.

GitHub Actions with a schedule trigger remain the best choice for unattended CI/CD automation that runs without any Anthropic-specific infrastructure.

BEYOND SCHEDULES: EVENT-DRIVEN AUTOMATION WITH CHANNELS

Scheduled tasks fire on a timer. But what if you want Claude to respond to events instead? Channels let you push messages from external sources (Telegram, Discord, webhooks) directly into a running Claude Code session. Think of it as the event-driven complement to time-driven scheduling: schedules ask "check every hour," channels ask "react when something happens." You can learn more in the official docs at code.claude.com/docs/en/channels.

When Scheduled Tasks Go Wrong​
1. The Task Didn't Fire​

What it looks like: You set up a /loop and nothing happens.

Why it happens: You exited the session, closed the terminal, or let the laptop sleep. Scheduled tasks only fire while Claude Code is running and idle.

Fix: Keep the session alive. For long-running monitoring, combine with tmux (Lesson 23) to prevent session death.

2. Hit the 50-Task Limit​

What it looks like: Claude refuses to create a new scheduled task.

Why it happens: You have 50 active tasks in the session. Each /loop and each one-time reminder counts against this limit.

Fix: Ask Claude to list your tasks and cancel ones you no longer need. Old reminders that already fired are automatically cleaned up, but active loops accumulate.

3. Seconds Aren't Working​

What it looks like: You typed /loop 30s check the logs but it fires every minute, not every 30 seconds.

Why it happens: The cron system has one-minute granularity. Seconds are rounded up to the nearest minute.

Fix: Accept minute-level precision. If you genuinely need sub-minute polling, that is a different tool (a shell watch command, for instance).

4. Tasks Didn't Survive a Restart​

What it looks like: You restarted Claude Code and all your scheduled tasks are gone.

Why it happens: This is by design. Session-scoped means session-scoped.

Fix: Recreate the tasks, or switch to a durable alternative (Desktop scheduled tasks, GitHub Actions) for workflows that must persist.

What's Next​

The next section covers Claude Cowork -- Claude's desktop application that brings a visual interface to everything you have been doing in the terminal. Cowork has its own scheduling capabilities through Desktop scheduled tasks, which offer the persistence that session-scoped /loop deliberately avoids.

Try With AI​

Exercise 1: Your First Scheduled Task (Predict + Run)

Before running this, predict: how many times will this fire in 3 minutes?

/loop 1m tell me the current time and count how many files are in this directory


Watch it fire. Was your prediction correct? Remember: the first fire may have jitter, and cron has one-minute granularity.

What you're learning: The basic /loop lifecycle -- scheduling, observing fires, and understanding the one-minute minimum interval. Predicting before running builds intuition for timing behavior.

Exercise 2: List, Inspect, Cancel (Investigate)

First, create two scheduled tasks:

/loop 5m check git status

remind me in 10 minutes to review the diff


Now ask:

what scheduled tasks do I have?


Examine the output: each task has an 8-character ID, a schedule, and a prompt. Cancel just the recurring one by name or ID. Verify the reminder survived by listing tasks again.

What you're learning: The full CronList/CronDelete lifecycle. Understanding task IDs and selective cancellation is essential for managing multiple concurrent tasks without losing track.

Exercise 3: Three Interval Variants (Modify)

Try all three interval forms in sequence:

/loop 2m check the git log for new commits

/loop check the git log for new commits every 5 minutes

/loop check the git log for new commits


After each, ask Claude to list your tasks. Compare the intervals Claude chose. What did the third one (no explicit interval) default to?

What you're learning: The flexibility of /loop's interval parsing -- leading, trailing, and default. Understanding defaults (10 minutes) prevents surprises.

Exercise 4: Design a Monitoring Workflow (Make)

Design and implement a complete monitoring workflow with four parts:

A recurring check every 5 minutes that runs git status and reports any uncommitted changes
A one-time reminder in 15 minutes to commit your work
List all tasks to verify both are scheduled
After the reminder fires, cancel the recurring check

Run each step and verify it works before moving to the next.

What you're learning: Composing multiple scheduled tasks into a coherent workflow -- the same pattern you would use for deployment monitoring, PR babysitting, or build verification in real projects.

Flashcards Study Aid​
Loading flashcards...
