Transactions & Atomicity

In Lesson 4, you defined relationships between models and queried linked data with joins. Now you face a different problem: what happens when a write operation involves multiple steps, and one of them fails halfway through?

Imagine you are transferring $100 from your Food budget to Entertainment. The debit goes through: your Food balance drops by $100. Then the credit fails. Crash. Network error. Doesn't matter why. Your $100 just vanished into thin air. Not in Food. Not in Entertainment. Gone.

You might be thinking: "That can't really happen, right?" It absolutely can. And it does. Every production system that handles money or inventory has battle scars from exactly this scenario. The fix is not hope or retry logic. The fix is a transaction: a boundary that guarantees either both writes happen, or neither does.

KEY TERMS FOR THIS LESSON
Transaction: A group of database operations that must ALL succeed or ALL fail: there's no middle ground
Atomicity: The "all-or-nothing" property: like a light switch, it's either on or off, never halfway
Invariant: A truth that must always hold: "debits and credits in a transfer always net to zero" is an invariant. If it ever breaks, something went wrong.
How Transactions Work​

A transaction wraps multiple database operations into a single unit of work. The database keeps all changes in a temporary state until you explicitly say "commit" (make permanent) or "rollback" (discard everything). If anything goes wrong before the commit, every change since the transaction began is undone automatically.

Transaction States:

  ┌─────────┐     ops succeed     ┌──────────┐
  │  BEGIN   │───────────────────►│  COMMIT   │
  │          │                    │ (durable) │
  └────┬─────┘                    └──────────┘
       │
       │ any op fails
       │
       ▼
  ┌──────────┐
  │ ROLLBACK │
  │ (undo    │
  │  ALL ops)│
  └──────────┘

  Example: Budget Transfer
  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
  │ BEGIN                               │
  │   1. Debit $100 from Food     ✓    │
  │   2. Credit $100 to Fun      ✗    │
  │                                     │
  │ → ROLLBACK: Debit is also undone   │
  │ → Result: $0 changed (correct!)    │
  └─────────────────────────────────────┘


That last line is the key insight. After a rollback, your data looks exactly as it did before the transfer attempt. No phantom debits. No missing money. The database pretends the whole thing never happened.

(Partial writes: because nothing says "professional software" like $100 disappearing from both accounts.)

Directing an Atomic Transfer​

Here is how you describe an atomic budget transfer to your agent. The key requirement is in the last line: both writes must succeed together, or neither does.

What you tell the agent

I need to transfer $100 from the Food budget to Entertainment. This must be atomic: either both the debit and credit go through, or neither does. If anything fails, roll back both. No partial transfers. Show me what happens when the transfer succeeds.

What you verify

python test_transfer.py

Output:
  Transfer: $100.00 from Food → Entertainment
  ✓ Debit:  -$100.00 from Food
  ✓ Credit: +$100.00 to Entertainment
  ✓ Committed. Net change: $0.00
  Expense count: 2 new rows (one debit, one credit)


The net change is $0.00: the money moved, it did not disappear. One debit row and one credit row were written in a single atomic operation.

The Failure Drill​

Reading about atomicity is not the same as proving it works. Direct your agent to simulate a failed transfer and show you the row counts before and after.

What you tell the agent

Try to transfer $100 to a category that does not exist (use ID 9999 as the destination). Show me the error, then query the database and prove zero new rows were created.

What you verify

python test_failed_transfer.py

Output:
  Attempting transfer to category 9999...
  ✗ Failed: category 9999 does not exist
  Rolling back...
  Expense count before: 2
  Expense count after:  2
  ✓ Rollback confirmed — zero partial rows created


What the output means: the debit was staged but never committed because the credit failed. The rollback undid both. The count stayed at 2, proving no phantom debit leaked through.

This invariant check is stronger than checking return messages alone. A function can return {"success": False} while still leaving partial rows behind if the rollback was missing. The only proof is querying the database directly.

PAUSE AND REFLECT

Think about the transfer function you just saw. What would happen if step 1 (debit) committed in one session and step 2 (credit) ran in a different session? What if the second session crashed? Where did the money go?

The Multi-Session Anti-Pattern​

The most dangerous mistake is splitting related operations across separate sessions. Here is what that looks like:

Bad pattern:

Session A writes the debit and commits
Session B writes the credit and fails

Result: irreversible partial state. The debit is permanent because Session A already committed. Session B's rollback only undoes Session B's work: it cannot reach back into Session A and undo the debit. Your $100 is gone.

(This is why related database writes should never live in separate sessions. If they must succeed together, they must live in the same transaction. Period.)

Another frequent mistake is catching an exception and returning without calling rollback. That leaves the failed transaction state unresolved and causes downstream confusion: later queries in the same session may behave unpredictably because the session is in a "dirty" state.

Input Validation: Necessary but Not Sufficient​

Transactions prevent partial writes. They do not correct bad business inputs. You still need validation rules:

Validate that the amount is positive
Validate that source and target categories are different
Validate ownership scope if categories are user-specific

Think of it this way: transactions protect the mechanics of your write (all-or-nothing). Input validation protects the meaning of your write (is this a sensible operation?). You need both.

Invariants: The Test That Catches Everything​

An invariant is a truth about your data that must always hold. For budget transfers, the core invariants are:

Transfer ledger entries for a completed move always net to zero
Category totals before and after a transfer preserve the global sum
Failed transfers produce no new rows

Writing these invariants into tests gives you faster confidence than manual spot checking. When a test asserts "the sum of all amounts for this transfer is zero," it catches bugs that return-message checks miss entirely.

When in doubt, choose stronger safety:

Explicit rollback in every except block
Explicit invariant assertions in every test
Explicit post-failure query checks that verify actual database state
Debug Posture for Transaction Bugs​

When something goes wrong with a transaction, follow this discipline:

Distrust return messages without database verification
Inspect persisted rows directly after both success and failure paths
Treat any partial side effect as a severity-one defect

If your function returns {"success": False} but the database has one new row instead of zero, you have a transaction bug. The return message lied. The database told the truth. Always trust the database over application-level return values.

What breaks next? Write safety can still fail in production if cloud connection handling is weak. Deployment reliability is next.

Try With AI​

Setup: Open Claude or ChatGPT with your budget tracker models from this chapter.

Prompt 1: Atomicity Classifier​
For each scenario, classify "needs atomic transaction" vs "does not need atomic transaction":
- single insert (one new expense)
- transfer between two categories (debit + credit)
- monthly summary read (SELECT with GROUP BY)
- merge category migration (move all expenses from category A to B, then delete A)
Explain the failure mode if atomicity is missing for each one that needs it.


What you're learning: Not every database operation needs a transaction boundary. Single reads and single writes are already atomic by default. The skill is recognizing which operations involve multiple steps where partial completion would corrupt your data. This classification instinct prevents both under-protection (missing transactions where needed) and over-protection (wrapping single inserts in unnecessary transaction ceremony).

Prompt 2: Rollback Proof Drill​
Write a transaction function that intentionally fails after the first insert.
Then show the post-failure query proving zero rows were committed.
Use SQLAlchemy 2.0 style and explicit rollback.


What you're learning: Proving rollback works requires more than reading the return value. You need to query the database after the failure and verify the row count is unchanged. This drill builds the habit of verifying database state directly: a practice that catches transaction bugs that return-message checking misses.

Prompt 3: Apply to Your Domain​
Think of a multi-step operation in a project you're building. Maybe it's: creating a user account + sending a welcome email + logging the event. Or: transferring inventory between warehouses. Break it into steps and ask: "If step 2 fails, what happens to step 1?" Design the transaction boundary.


What you're learning: Transaction design isn't just for banks. Any operation where partial completion would corrupt your data needs an atomic boundary. Recognizing these moments, and wrapping them in try/except/rollback: is a skill that separates reliable systems from fragile ones.

Checkpoint​
 I can explain atomicity as all-or-nothing business truth: either both writes happen, or neither does.
 I directed the agent to build an atomic transfer and verified the output shows both debit and credit rows.
 I directed the agent to simulate a failed transfer and read the rollback confirmation (zero partial rows).
 I can explain why splitting related writes across two separate sessions is dangerous.
 I can distinguish schema validity from transaction correctness: data can pass all schema rules and still be business-wrong without an atomic boundary.
Flashcards Study Aid​
