Reading What Your Agent Does

In the last lesson, Ali explored Dev's server. He knows where things live -- /home for users, /var for logs, /etc for configuration. But knowing where things are is different from understanding what they say.

When Claude Code runs a command and the output reads drwxr-xr-x 3 ali ali 4096 Feb 14 09:22 competitor-tracker, Ali nods and pretends he understands. He sees the words. He sees the numbers. He has no idea what most of them mean.

"You don't need to speak Linux. You need to read it."

This lesson makes the black box transparent. By the end, you'll read command output the way you read a dashboard -- quickly, confidently, knowing what matters and what to skip.

Commands Are Sentences​

Every Linux command follows the same structure. Once you see it, you can't unsee it.

Think of a command as a sentence. It has a verb (what to do), adverbs (how to do it), and an object (what to do it to).

ls   -la   /var/log
|     |       |
verb  adverbs object

ls is the verb: "list"
-la is two adverbs: -l means "long format" (show details), -a means "all" (include hidden files)
/var/log is the object: the directory to list

Read it as a sentence: "List, in long format, all files in /var/log."

That's it. Every command you'll ever see follows this pattern. The verb changes. The adverbs change. The object changes. The grammar never does.

Pause.

Go back and read that command one more time. Verb. Adverbs. Object. If you can parse one command, you can parse all of them. The rest of this lesson is vocabulary, not new grammar.

Your Agent's Vocabulary: 15 Commands​

Here's the part where most tutorials hand you a list of 50 commands and tell you to memorize them. We're not doing that.

Think of these 15 commands as vocabulary cards for a language you're visiting, not moving to. You don't memorize vocabulary cards. You recognize words when you see them. When Claude Code runs grep in front of you, you'll think "ah, searching for text" instead of "what is that?"

Navigation​
Command	What It Does	Read It As
ls	Lists files in a directory	"Show me what's here"
cd	Changes your current directory	"Go to this folder"
pwd	Prints your current location	"Where am I right now?"
Inspection​
Command	What It Does	Read It As
cat	Shows the entire contents of a file	"Read this file to me"
head	Shows the first few lines of a file	"Show me the beginning"
tail	Shows the last few lines of a file	"Show me the end"
less	Opens a file for scrolling through	"Let me browse this file"
Measurement​
Command	What It Does	Read It As
du	Measures disk usage of files/folders	"How big is this?"
df	Shows free disk space on the server	"How much room is left?"
wc	Counts lines, words, or characters	"How many lines in this file?"
Search​
Command	What It Does	Read It As
find	Locates files by name, type, or date	"Find files matching this pattern"
grep	Searches inside files for specific text	"Find this word inside these files"
Process​
Command	What It Does	Read It As
ps	Lists running processes	"What's running right now?"
top	Shows live resource usage	"What's using CPU and memory?"
kill	Stops a running process	"Shut this program down"

Fifteen commands. That's the entire working vocabulary for server operations. When Claude Code runs any of these, you'll know what it's doing before it explains the result.

Reading Real Output​

Vocabulary is recognition. Now let's practice reading.

Tell Claude Code:

Show me everything running on this server right now with full details.


Claude Code will likely run something like ps aux. Here's what that output looks like:

USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY   STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.1 169360 11840 ?     Ss   Feb12   0:08 /sbin/init
ali       1247  0.3  2.1 458920 42880 ?     Sl   09:22   1:45 python3 competitor_tracker.py
postgres  892   0.1  1.5 215460 30720 ?     Ss   Feb12   5:23 /usr/lib/postgresql/15/bin/postgres
root       456  0.0  0.0  72312  5888 ?     Ss   Feb12   0:01 /usr/sbin/sshd


What you see: A wall of text with columns that don't line up neatly.

What this means:

Column	What It Tells You
USER	Who owns this process. Ali's agent runs as ali. The database runs as postgres.
PID	Process ID -- a unique number for each running program. You need this to stop a specific process.
%CPU	How much processor power this process uses. Ali's agent at 0.3% is healthy. 95% would be a problem.
%MEM	How much memory this process uses. The agent at 2.1% is fine. The database at 1.5% is normal for PostgreSQL.
COMMAND	The actual program running. This is the most useful column -- it tells you what each process IS.

Ali looks at this and sees his agent (competitor_tracker.py), the database it writes to (postgres), and the SSH service keeping him connected (sshd). Three processes that tell the whole story of his deployment.

Now ask Claude Code:

How much disk space is left on this server?


Claude Code runs df -h. The -h flag means "human-readable" -- show sizes in GB instead of raw bytes.

Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/sda1        50G   23G   25G  48% /
tmpfs           2.0G   12M  2.0G   1% /dev/shm


What you see: Two rows of numbers.

What this means: The server has a 50 GB disk. 23 GB is used. 25 GB is free. At 48% capacity, Ali has room. If this number were 90%, he'd need to investigate what's eating space -- and he already knows the command for that (du).

File Permissions: Who Can Do What​

This is the one that makes people's eyes glaze over. It shouldn't. Permissions are a building with three levels of keycards.

Tell Claude Code:

Show me the detailed file listing for Ali's home directory.


Claude Code runs ls -la /home/ali and you see:

drwxr-xr-x  5 ali ali  4096 Feb 14 09:22 .
drwxr-xr-x  3 root root 4096 Feb 12 14:30 ..
-rw-------  1 ali ali   220 Feb 12 14:30 .bash_history
-rw-r--r--  1 ali ali  3526 Feb 12 14:30 .bashrc
drwxr-xr-x  2 ali ali  4096 Feb 14 09:22 competitor-tracker
-rw-rw-r--  1 ali ali   892 Feb 14 09:25 .env


Focus on the first column. Take drwxr-xr-x:

d   rwx   r-x   r-x
|    |      |      |
|    |      |      +-- Everyone else: read + execute
|    |      +--------- Group: read + execute
|    +---------------- Owner: read + write + execute
+-- Type: d = directory


The first character is the file type. d means directory. - means regular file.

Then come three groups of three characters. Each group represents a level of keycard:

Owner (positions 2-4): The person who owns the file. Full keycard.
Group (positions 5-7): People in the same team. Limited keycard.
Everyone (positions 8-10): Any user on the server. Visitor badge.

Each position is either a letter (permission granted) or a dash (permission denied):

Letter	Permission	For Files	For Directories
r	Read	View the contents	List what's inside
w	Write	Modify the contents	Add or delete files inside
x	Execute	Run as a program	Enter the directory
-	Denied	Cannot do this	Cannot do this

Now decode Ali's files:

drwxr-xr-x competitor-tracker -- Directory. Ali can do everything. Group and everyone can enter and look, but not modify.
-rw------- .bash_history -- File. Only Ali can read and write it. Nobody else can see his command history.
-rw-rw-r-- .env -- File. Ali can read and write. His group can read and write. Everyone can read (but not write).

That .env file permission is a problem. The .env file contains API keys and database passwords. "Everyone can read" means any user on the server could see Ali's secrets. In Lesson 5, Ali will fix this. For now, he can read the warning sign.

Putting It Together​

Ali directs Claude Code to run a health check:

You: Check if my competitor-tracker agent is running and healthy.
     Show me the process, resources, and whether the log file is growing.


Claude Code runs ps aux | grep competitor_tracker, tail -5 /var/log/competitor-tracker/agent.log, and du -sh /var/log/competitor-tracker/. Three commands. Thirty seconds. Ali sees his agent is running (PID 1247, 0.3% CPU, 2.1% memory), the log shows fresh entries with no errors, and the log folder is a manageable 12 MB.

He didn't type any of those commands. He directed Claude Code with a single sentence, then read the results. That's the skill. Not typing commands. Reading their output.

Try With AI​
Prompt 1: Read Process Output​
Show me all running processes on this machine with full details.
Pick any three lines from the output and explain each column to me.
What process is using the most memory?


What you're learning: How to read ps aux output. The column headers (USER, PID, %CPU, %MEM, COMMAND) are the same on every Linux server. Once you can read one, you can read them all.

Prompt 2: Explain Permissions on Real Files​
Show me the permissions on /etc/passwd and /etc/shadow.
Why are they different? What would happen if shadow had
the same permissions as passwd?


What you're learning: Why permissions matter for security. /etc/passwd is world-readable (every program needs it to map usernames to IDs). /etc/shadow stores password hashes and is locked down. This is the most concrete example of "permissions protect secrets."

Prompt 3: du vs df​
Run du -sh /var/log and df -h for me. What's the difference
between these two commands? When would I use one vs the other?


What you're learning: The difference between measuring a specific folder (du -- "how big is this thing?") and measuring the entire disk (df -- "how much room is left?"). Both answer questions about space, but from different angles. du is a magnifying glass. df is a fuel gauge.

Flashcards Study Aid​

You can read the server now. Process lists, disk usage, file permissions -- none of it is a black box anymore. But Ali's agent files are scattered. The script lives in one place, the config in another, and the logs are vanishing into a default location nobody checks. Time to build a proper home.
