Git Foundations

Open a Google Doc. Type a paragraph. Delete it. Press Ctrl+Z. It comes back.

Now open a project folder with 47 files. Ask Claude Code to reorganize them. It moves, renames, and rewrites 12 files. The result is wrong. Press Ctrl+Z. Nothing happens. There is no undo for a project folder.

Unless you have Git.

"Ctrl+Z works for one file. Git works for your entire life's work."

In 1998, someone at Pixar accidentally ran a delete command on the Toy Story 2 production files. The animation studio lost 90% of two years of work in seconds. Their backup system had silently failed weeks earlier. The entire movie was saved only because one employee, Galyn Susman, had a copy on her home computer: she'd been working remotely while caring for her newborn. Without that stroke of luck, one of the most beloved animated films ever made would have been lost forever. (Source)

Version control exists because of disasters like this.

PREREQUISITES

Before following along, complete the Before You Start setup in the chapter introduction: you need Git installed, a GitHub account, and a one-time Git configuration.

Sarah's Problem​

Sarah is organizing a community fundraiser. She has a folder with budget spreadsheets, flyer designs, and a volunteer list. Last Tuesday she spent two hours updating the budget. Then she tried a new layout and accidentally saved over the old version.

The old budget is gone. No undo. No backup. Two hours of work, lost.

"I wish I could go back to yesterday's version," she says.

Git solves exactly this problem.

The Concept: Snapshots, Not Files​

You've used Track Changes in Word or Google Docs. You can see who changed what and when. Git is Track Changes for your entire project folder, not just one document. Every change, every file, with the ability to rewind to any moment in history.

Each snapshot is called a commit (a photograph of your entire project at one moment in time). You decide when to take each photo and what to include.

Watch Your Agent Do It​

Let's create Sarah's fundraiser project and watch what happens when we tell Claude Code to protect it.

What you tell your agent: "Create a new folder called fundraiser-project with a budget file and a volunteer list. Then set up version control."

What the agent does:

mkdir fundraiser-project
cd fundraiser-project
echo "Budget: $500 for venue, $200 for food" > budget.txt
echo "Volunteers: Sarah, Maya, Jordan" > volunteers.txt
git init


What this means: git init creates a hidden .git folder inside your project. This folder is Git's brain: it stores your entire project history. Delete .git and you lose all your snapshots. Keep it safe.

You can see it yourself:

ls -la


The .git directory appears in the listing. Everything Git knows about your project lives there.

What Your Agent Sees​

After creating those files, your agent checks what changed:

What you tell your agent: "What's the current state of my project?"

What the agent does:

git status


What you see:

On branch main

No commits yet

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
        budget.txt
        volunteers.txt


Git sees two files it doesn't know about yet. "Untracked" means Git noticed them but hasn't started protecting them. Think of it like a hotel guest who walked in but hasn't checked in yet.

The Staging Area: Packing Your Suitcase​

Your agent doesn't photograph everything at once. You choose what goes in each snapshot. This in-between step is called the staging area.

Think of it like packing a suitcase. You lay out everything on the bed (your working directory), then decide what goes in the suitcase (staging area), then close the suitcase (commit).

What you tell your agent: "Prepare the budget file for saving."

What the agent does:

git add budget.txt
git status


What you see:

Changes to be committed:
    new file:   budget.txt

Untracked files:
    volunteers.txt


budget.txt moved from "untracked" to "ready to commit" (shown in green). volunteers.txt is still waiting. You control what goes in each snapshot.

Why not add everything? Sometimes you have personal notes, temporary files, or half-finished work you don't want in the snapshot. The staging area gives you control.

Let's stage everything and take our first snapshot:

git add volunteers.txt
git commit -m "Initial fundraiser files: budget and volunteer list"


What happened: Git took a photograph of your entire project. Both files are protected. The message describes what this snapshot contains.

Verify it:

git log


You see your commit with a unique ID, your name, the date, and the message. This is your first restore point.

When Things Go Wrong​

Sarah edits the budget. She accidentally deletes the food line and types nonsense over the venue costs.

Let's simulate this. Make a bad edit:

What you tell your agent: "Replace the budget contents with this broken version."

What the agent does:

echo "Budget: XXXXX broken data" > budget.txt


Sarah panics. The file is ruined. But she committed earlier. Git has her back.

Seeing What Changed​

Before undoing anything, look at what changed.

What you tell your agent: "Show me what's different from the last snapshot."

What the agent does:

git diff budget.txt


What you see:

--- a/budget.txt
+++ b/budget.txt
@@ -1 +1 @@
-Budget: $500 for venue, $200 for food
+Budget: XXXXX broken data


The - line shows what was there before. The + line shows what's there now. Red means removed. Green means added. This is like comparing two photographs side by side.

Sarah Panics (Then Recovers)​

Sarah sees the diff. She knows the file is broken. She Googles "undo git changes" and finds a StackOverflow answer suggesting git reset --hard. She runs it without reading the fine print.

git reset --hard


Everything goes back to normal. The broken budget is fixed. She exhales.

Then she checks the volunteer list: the one she spent yesterday afternoon updating. It's gone too. git reset --hard doesn't undo one file. It resets everything to the last commit. Her volunteer updates weren't committed yet. They're gone. Actually gone.

Sarah just learned the most expensive lesson in version control: the nuclear option doesn't have a confirmation dialog.

There's a better way. Git has three levels of undo: each one more powerful than the last, each one more dangerous. The key is choosing the smallest tool for the job.

Three Levels of Undo​

Here's the decision tree for what to tell your agent. Every mistake falls into one of three categories.

Scenario 1: You edited a file but haven't staged it yet​

Sarah just made a bad edit. She hasn't run git add. The fix is simple.

What you tell your agent: "Throw away my changes to budget.txt. Go back to the last saved version."

What the agent does:

git restore budget.txt


Check the file:

cat budget.txt


The original budget is back. The bad edit is gone. The file still exists: Git just rewound it to the last committed version.

Scenario 2: You staged the wrong file​

You accidentally told Git to include a file you didn't want in the next snapshot.

What you tell your agent: "I staged the wrong file. Remove it from the staging area but keep the file."

What the agent does:

git restore --staged budget.txt


The file leaves the staging area. It goes back to "modified" or "untracked." Nothing is deleted. The file is exactly as you left it.

Scenario 3: You already committed the mistake​

You took a snapshot that includes bad changes. You need to undo the whole commit.

What you tell your agent: "Undo my last commit but keep the files so I can fix them."

What the agent does:

git reset HEAD~1


The commit disappears from history. Your files stay in the working directory. You can fix them and commit again.

CAUTION

git reset --hard HEAD~1 deletes the commit and throws away all file changes. This is what happened to Sarah's volunteer list: the nuclear option with no confirmation dialog. Only use it when you're certain you want to erase everything.

Quick Reference: Which Undo Do I Need?​
Situation	What to tell your agent	What it runs
Bad edit, not staged	"Throw away my changes to this file"	git restore <file>
Staged the wrong file	"Unstage this file"	git restore --staged <file>
Bad commit, keep files	"Undo my last commit"	git reset HEAD~1
Bad commit, erase everything	"Erase my last commit completely"	git reset --hard HEAD~1

Sarah's project is safe: she can undo bad edits, unstage mistakes, and roll back commits. But she learned something the hard way: one wrong command wiped out work she hadn't committed yet. What if she could try risky ideas in a completely separate space, where mistakes can't touch her real project?

That's what branches solve, and that's the next lesson.

Try With AI​

Understand the snapshot concept:

"I just learned that Git commits are snapshots of my entire project folder, not just individual files. Explain how this is different from saving a single file. Use a real-world analogy that doesn't involve video games."

Explore the staging area:

"Why does Git make me choose which files to include in each commit? Why not just save everything automatically? Give me three real scenarios where selective staging is useful."

Break something on purpose:

"Help me practice Git recovery. Create a small project with three files, then walk me through deliberately breaking one file and recovering it with git restore. Then walk me through staging the wrong file and unstaging it. I want to feel the panic and the relief so I'm not scared when it happens for real."

Write better commit messages:

"Here are five bad commit messages: 'update', 'fix stuff', 'changes', 'WIP', 'asdf'. For each one, rewrite it as a clear message that explains WHY the change was made, not just WHAT changed. Then give me a template I can follow: what should the first line say? When should I add more detail?"

Flashcards Study Aid​
