Spend Analytics and Consolidation

Your organisation buys corrugated cardboard boxes from four different vendors across four manufacturing sites. Site A in Coventry is paying £0.38 per unit. Site B in Leeds is paying £0.31: from a different vendor, same specification. Site C in Bristol is paying £0.41. Site D in Glasgow is paying £0.35 from the same vendor as Coventry, but at a different price.

Nobody in your organisation knows this. Each site negotiates its own contracts. The category is considered routine: "it's just boxes."

The annual cost difference between the worst and best rate is 35%. If all four sites bought at the Leeds rate, the saving would be approximately £47,000 per year: achievable by issuing one group RFQ.

This is what spend analytics finds. Not dramatic supply chain failures. Not exotic risk scenarios. Ordinary, systematic, invisible procurement inefficiency: the kind that accumulates quietly across every category in your supplier base until someone looks at it properly.

Three Strategic Questions​

Spend analytics is not a reporting function. Its purpose is to answer three questions that procurement leadership cannot answer from individual purchase records or from memory:

Question 1: Who are we actually buying from?

Most organisations know their top 10 vendors by spend. Few know that they have 9 vendors in the packaging category when 3 would give them better pricing and simpler management. Vendor consolidation analysis answers this question category by category.

Question 2: What are we paying?

Price consistency analysis asks: are different business units or sites paying different prices for the same item? This is the most common and most expensive procurement failure. Category by category, it reveals the gap between your best negotiated rate and what your other sites are actually paying.

Question 3: What should we be paying?

Market benchmarking compares your current price against available market data. It answers whether your current rate was competitive at negotiation and whether it remains competitive today. Markets move; contract prices do not.

The Four /spend-analysis Analysis Types​

The skill handles all four spend analysis types, each invoked with a different approach.

Type 1: Category Spend Overview​

The starting point: total spend by category, vendor count, business unit coverage, and purchase order compliance:

/spend-analysis
> Agent: Please provide the spend data or connect to ERP via MCP.

> User: Analyse Q1 2026 spend across all indirect procurement
        categories. Focus on: packaging materials, office supplies,
        and logistics. Identify consolidation opportunities and
        price inconsistency.


Sample output:

SPEND ANALYSIS: Indirect Procurement — Q1 2026
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

PACKAGING MATERIALS — Total Q1 spend: £284,000

VENDOR COUNT: 9 vendors for packaging across 4 sites
  ⚠️ Consolidation opportunity: 6 of 9 vendors supply corrugated
  cardboard. 3 vendors supply protective foam. 2 supply pallet wrap.
  All three sub-categories are commodity items with competitive markets.

PRICE INCONSISTENCY — CORRUGATED CARDBOARD (most significant finding):
  Site A (Coventry): paying £0.38/unit from Vendor D
  Site B (Leeds):    paying £0.31/unit from Vendor G (same spec)
  Site C (Bristol):  paying £0.41/unit from Vendor B
  Site D (Glasgow):  paying £0.35/unit from Vendor D
  Variance:          35% price gap for identical specification
  Annual saving from price alignment to best rate: est. £47,000/year

RECOMMENDED ACTION:
  Issue a group RFQ for corrugated cardboard across all 4 sites.
  Combined annual volume: ~£180,000 — enough to attract major packaging
  manufacturers (DS Smith, Smurfit) at significantly better rates.
  Target: 20–25% saving on combined cardboard spend = £36K–£45K/year.
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Type 2: Vendor Consolidation Analysis​

For a specific category with multiple vendors:

/spend-analysis category:"[Category name]"
                period:"last 12 months"
                focus:"vendor count, price consistency, consolidation opportunity"


The output quantifies current state (vendor count, total spend, price range), consolidated state (target vendor count, combined volume, estimated discount at volume), and risk assessment (supply continuity risk, switching effort).

The consolidation candidate criteria: multiple vendors supplying the same specification, no strategic reason for multiple sources, combined volume meaningful to a preferred vendor, competitive market with alternatives. Corrugated cardboard meets all four criteria.

Type 3: Price Consistency Check​

Identifies the same item or specification being bought at different prices across sites or business units:

/spend-analysis type:"price-consistency"
                category:"[Category]"
                period:"[Period]"


The output shows a price table with all sites/BUs, the variance percentage, the best available rate, and the annual saving if all sites align to it. The corrugated cardboard example demonstrates this: 35% variance, £47,000 annual saving from alignment.

Type 4: Market Benchmark​

Compares your current price against independently sourced market data:

/spend-analysis type:"market-benchmark"
                category:"[Category]"
                current-spend:"[Your spend data]"
                volume:"[Your volume]"


The benchmark output always includes the data source and date, and a data quality rating (HIGH for published price indices, MEDIUM for survey data, LOW for estimates). A market benchmark without a source is not a benchmark: it is a guess.

MARKET BENCHMARKS

The agent uses web search to find publicly available market pricing data. If no reliable benchmark exists for the category, the output will say so: "no reliable benchmark found": rather than fabricate a number. Never use a benchmark that lacks a cited source and date.

The Savings Pipeline​

Identified savings are not delivered savings. The savings pipeline tracks three stages:

PROCUREMENT SAVINGS PIPELINE — [Date]
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
IDENTIFIED OPPORTUNITIES:
Category        Type             Est. Saving  Status   Owner  Timeline
Corrugated CB   Consolidation    £36K–£45K    Draft    [Name] Q3 2026
Logistics       Carrier change   £64,800      Active   [Name] Q2 2026
Office supplies Price alignment  £12,000      Active   [Name] Q2 2026

TOTAL PIPELINE:  £113,000–£122,000
CAPTURED YTD:    £28,000
REMAINING:       £85,000–£94,000
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════


Identified: Opportunity found, not yet actioned Active: RFQ, negotiation, or implementation in progress Captured: Contract signed, saving locked in

The pipeline is not a trophy cabinet: it is a work queue. Identified savings that stay in "Draft" status for more than 60 days are either not real or not resourced. Both are important information for procurement leadership.

The Spend Intelligence Agent​

The spend-intelligence-agent monitors spending patterns continuously: flagging new price inconsistencies as they emerge, tracking vendor count drift in categories that should be consolidating, and generating monthly savings pipeline updates.

Without the agent, price inconsistencies accumulate between analysis cycles. With it, a new vendor appearing in a consolidated category triggers an automatic alert within days rather than months.

Exercise: The Spend Consolidation Project (Exercise 5)​

Type: Strategic Procurement Time: 75 minutes Plugin commands: /spend-analysis, /vendor-assess Goal: Identify and build the business case for one spend consolidation initiative worth at least £50,000 per year

Step 1; Category Map​

Pull total spend by category (last 12 months) from your ERP or procurement system. Create a category map:

Category	Total Spend	Vendor Count	Business Units Buying
			

Categories with high vendor counts and multiple business units buying are your primary consolidation candidates.

Step 2; Consolidation Analysis​

For your top 3 consolidation candidate categories:

/spend-analysis category:"[Category name]"
                period:"last 12 months"
                focus:"vendor count, price consistency, consolidation opportunity"


For each category, quantify:

Current: how many vendors, what price variance, what total spend
Consolidated: what volume would a preferred vendor receive?
Saving: at what volume discount would the saving justify the consolidation effort?
Risk: what is the supply continuity risk of reducing vendor count?
Step 3; Market Benchmark​

For your highest-opportunity category:

/spend-analysis type:"market-benchmark"
                category:"[Category]"
                current-spend:"[Your spend data]"
                volume:"[Your volume]"


Compare your current price against the market. If you are paying above market: why, and what would renegotiation require?

Step 4; RFQ Strategy​

For the category you select for consolidation:

/vendor-assess type:"rfq-strategy"
               category:"[Category]"
               current-vendors:"[Names]"
               target-saving:"[£ or % target]"
               timeline:"[When contract(s) expire]"


Output: which vendors to invite to the RFQ, what the RFQ should specify, what commercial terms to prioritise, and what the selection criteria should be.

Step 5; Business Case​

Build a one-page business case for the consolidation initiative:

Current state: spend, vendor count, price variance
Proposed state: consolidated supply, target price, risk management approach
Saving: annual saving in £ with timeline to realise
Investment: time and resource to run the RFQ and transition
Net benefit: payback period

Deliverable: Category map with consolidation candidates ranked, analysis of top 3 categories, market benchmark for primary opportunity, RFQ strategy document, and one-page business case with financial justification. Target: one initiative worth at least £50,000 per year.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Reproduce: Apply what you just learned to a simple case.

I am the procurement manager for a 600-person professional services
firm. Here is our IT spend breakdown from last year:

Software licences: £840,000 across 14 vendors
  - Microsoft 365: £320,000 (group contract)
  - Zoom: £45,000 (3 different plans across 4 offices — prices differ)
  - Salesforce: £180,000 (negotiated 3 years ago)
  - 11 other SaaS tools: £295,000 (individually purchased, no group terms)

Hardware: £210,000 across 6 vendors
  - Laptops: 4 suppliers (3 for Mac, 1 for Windows)
  - Monitors: 2 suppliers

Identify:
1. The top 3 consolidation opportunities with estimated savings
2. Any price inconsistencies worth investigating
3. Which category most likely has above-market pricing


What you are learning: The category overview is a triage exercise: identifying where the highest-return consolidation and renegotiation opportunities are before committing analysis resource.

Adapt: Modify the scenario to match your organisation.

For your own organisation (or one you know well), answer:

1. In which indirect spend category do you have the most vendors?
2. Are different sites or business units buying the same items
   at different prices?
3. When was the last time you benchmarked your top 5 spend
   categories against market rates?
4. What is your total procurement savings captured in the last
   12 months as a percentage of total addressable spend?

Then identify one category where you believe there is a
consolidation or price alignment opportunity. What evidence
would you gather to confirm it?


What you are learning: The gap between what your organisation knows about its procurement efficiency and what a structured spend analysis would reveal is where savings live. The question is whether procurement has the mandate and the tools to find them.

Apply: Extend to a new situation the lesson didn't cover directly.

Your CFO has asked procurement to deliver £500,000 in savings
over the next 12 months to offset a cost overrun in another
division.

Your total addressable procurement spend is £18M.

1. Which spend analysis types would you run first to identify
   the highest-probability savings opportunities?
2. What categories are most likely to yield significant savings
   in 12 months — and which would take longer?
3. How would you build the savings pipeline to track progress
   toward the £500K target?
4. What is a realistic savings target as a percentage of
   addressable spend for a 12-month programme?


What you are learning: Savings targets come from finance, not from procurement analysis. The question is how to work backward from a target to identify which categories and which levers can credibly deliver it: and in what timeframe.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 11: Vendor Communications and Disputes →
