Vendor Exit Protocol

The test of your procurement operating system is not how it performs when everything is working. It is how it performs when you receive an unexpected notification at 9:47am on a Monday morning.

The notification reads: your highest-risk Bottleneck vendor: the one supplying the sole-source component that your production line depends on: has announced it is closing its manufacturing operation. The closure date is in 60 days.

You have no qualified alternative. Your safety stock will last three weeks. Qualification of a new supplier takes a minimum of 90 days under normal circumstances. The maths is bad: you have 60 days to find a solution and 90 days of minimum requirements to meet.

This scenario is preventable. In most cases, financial distress signals exist weeks or months before a vendor closes. Geopolitical risk escalates gradually. Quality failures compound over time. The question is whether your monitoring system: specifically the Vendor Health Monitor deployed in Lesson 12: was watching closely enough to give you earlier warning. The second question is whether you qualified an alternative in the time that warning gave you.

This lesson assumes you did not get the early warning. The 60-day clock has started.

Exit Triggers​

Vendor exits are driven by four distinct trigger categories, each with a different risk profile and response timeline:

Trigger	Typical Warning Period	Primary Risk	Required Response
Financial distress	Weeks to months: signals exist	Receivership before transition completes	Immediate financial exposure assessment; secure outstanding stock
Quality failure	Compounding over months	Production halt; liability; regulatory	Stop new orders immediately; emergency qualification
Geopolitical event	Variable: can be sudden	Supply route disruption; force majeure	Activate contingency routing; assess inventory
Strategic sourcing	Planned: within your control	Transition cost; relationship damage	Managed communication; phased handover

The 60-day scenario in this lesson falls under financial distress with operational closure: the most time-pressured exit trigger.

Using /vendor-assess in Exit Mode​

The /vendor-assess skill includes an exit planning mode that generates the full structured exit plan when you specify the exit trigger and timeline.

/vendor-assess type:"exit-planning"
               vendor:"[Vendor name]"
               category:"[Category]"
               exit-trigger:"operational closure announced"
               timeline:"60 days"
               dependency:"sole-source"


The skill produces five output sections:

1. Immediate actions (Days 1-7)

Confirm outstanding purchase orders and their delivery status
Assess prepayments and amounts at risk
Inventory of company-owned tooling, moulds, and IP in the vendor's possession
Secure all technical documentation, specifications, and quality records
Initiate preliminary alternative sourcing search

2. Short-term mitigation (Days 8-30)

Emergency RFQ for the affected category
Assess current safety stock vs. production requirements
Identify any temporary bridge supply options (even at premium cost)
Communicate internally to operations, production planning, and finance
Issue formal transition notice to the exiting vendor

3. Transition plan (Days 31-60 and beyond)

Qualification process for emergency alternative supplier
Tool and IP transfer from exiting vendor (completed by Day 45)
Bridge supply arrangements to cover qualification period
Formal handover with full documentation

4. Communication requirements

Internal: operations, production planning, finance, executive team
Exiting vendor: formal notice, transition requirements, tool recovery schedule
Emergency alternatives: urgent outreach letters, brief specifications, timeline

5. Financial exposure

Value of outstanding orders at risk (if vendor enters receivership before completion)
Prepayments outstanding
Tool and IP value at risk
Premium cost of bridge supply and emergency qualification
DAYS 1-7: FINANCIAL AND ASSET SECURITY FIRST

The first week is not about finding a replacement: it is about protecting your financial position. Outstanding orders, prepayments, and company-owned tooling at the vendor's premises are at risk. If the vendor enters formal insolvency (administration, receivership), recovery becomes legally complex. The first priority is to complete or cancel outstanding orders, recover prepayments where possible, and create an inventory of all assets that must be retrieved.

Emergency RFQ​

When you need a qualified alternative supplier in a compressed timeframe, the standard procurement process is not optional: it is abbreviated. The quality and safety requirements remain; the timeline for competitive tender does not.

/vendor-assess type:"emergency-rfq"
               category:"[Category]"
               specification:"[Key technical requirements]"
               timeline:"Qualified alternative supplier needed within 45 days"
               volume:"[Annual volume and monthly demand]"
               qualification-minimum:"[Your minimum requirements — e.g. ISO 9001 + sample approval]"


The emergency RFQ output provides:

A list of potential alternative suppliers to contact for the category (based on category and specification data)
Minimum qualification requirements: what must be met before any first order can be placed
Commercial terms appropriate to a short-term bridge arrangement (typically no long-term commitment, premium acceptance, accelerated qualification audit)
Evaluation criteria for selecting among candidates
QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS CANNOT BE WAIVED

Emergency sourcing compresses the timeline, not the standards. If your process requires ISO 9001 certification and sample approval before a supplier can receive a first order, those requirements apply to an emergency source as much as a routine one. The bridge arrangement buys time to complete proper qualification: not a waiver of it. Accepting an unqualified source creates product liability, regulatory, and insurance exposure that outlasts the supply emergency.

The Communication Plan​

A vendor exit requires three distinct communications, each with a different audience, tone, and purpose. All three use the /vendor-communicate skill covered in Lesson 11.

Communication 1: Internal (Operations, Production, Finance)​

What: A factual brief on the supply disruption, impact assessment, and actions underway When: Within 24-48 hours of confirmed notification Tone: Calm, factual, action-oriented: the function of this communication is to prevent reactive decisions before the procurement team has a plan in place

Include: what has happened, timeline of the disruption, current inventory position, immediate actions procurement is taking, what other teams need to do (production scheduling adjustments, finance review of prepayments), next update timing.

Communication 2: To the Exiting Vendor​

What: A formal transition notice acknowledging the closure, confirming outstanding orders, and stating transition requirements When: Within the first week, after the internal financial assessment is complete Tone: Professional and firm: the vendor is a counterparty, not an adversary. A cooperative exit is in both parties' interest.

Critical elements:

Formal acknowledgement of the closure notification
Status of all outstanding purchase orders (which are to be fulfilled, which to be cancelled with refund)
Complete inventory of company-owned tooling, moulds, and intellectual property currently at the vendor's premises: with specific return-by dates
Technical documentation transfer requirements (drawings, specifications, quality records)
Any warranty obligations the vendor retains for goods already delivered

Use /vendor-communicate type:"exit-notice" with the tooling and IP inventory as explicit line items.

Communication 3: To Emergency Alternative Vendors​

What: A brief, urgent outreach to potential alternative suppliers When: Within the first two weeks, based on the emergency RFQ output Tone: Urgent, professional, factual: these are commercial conversations, not distress signals

Include: what category you are sourcing, the volume, your minimum qualification requirements, your timeline, and the contact for immediate follow-up. Do not reveal that you are in an emergency situation: communicate as a professional procurement team running a sourcing event with a specific timeline.

Post-Mortem: The Questions That Matter​

After the immediate crisis is managed, the procurement post-mortem determines whether this scenario recurs. It requires honest answers to three questions:

1. Could this have been predicted?

Review the signals that existed before the notification arrived: Was there financial news about this vendor in the months prior? Were OTD trends declining? Were there quality issues or partial deliveries that the Vendor Health Monitor would have flagged: if it had been configured for this vendor?

If this vendor was classified as Bottleneck in your classification register but not included in the Vendor Health Monitor's watch list, that is the monitoring gap. The Bottleneck quadrant exists precisely because sole-source, low-spend vendors are overlooked.

2. What monitoring would have given you earlier warning?

Identify the specific signal: financial news, OTD trend, quality rejection trend: that would have given you 30, 60, or 90 days of additional lead time. Then state the exact agent configuration change that would have surfaced it.

For example: "The vendor's parent company published restructuring news 8 weeks ago. Configuring the Vendor Health Monitor with daily financial news scans for this vendor would have triggered a hot alert at that point. Eight weeks earlier, we could have had an alternative qualification process underway."

3. What structural change prevents recurrence?

A post-mortem that produces no structural change is an incomplete post-mortem. The structural change for a Bottleneck vendor with no alternatives is always the same: qualify an alternative. State the specific action, the responsible owner, and the completion date.

In most cases: "Qualify one alternative supplier for [category] within 90 days. Owner: [Category Manager]. Success criteria: approved supplier on vendor master, first sample delivery received and passed."

Exercise: Build a Vendor Exit Protocol (Exercise 8)​

Type: Risk Management Time: 45 minutes Plugin commands: /vendor-assess, /vendor-communicate Goal: Complete vendor exit plan for a 60-day Bottleneck vendor closure scenario

PREREQUISITES

This exercise uses the vendor classification register you built in Exercise 1 (Lesson 3). You will select your highest-risk Bottleneck vendor from that register. If you have not completed Exercise 1, do so before continuing.

Step 1; Scenario Definition​

From your classification register (Exercise 1), identify the Bottleneck vendor with the highest risk rating: the one that scored highest on supply risk with no qualified alternative. For the exercise, assume you have received notification at 9:47am today that this vendor is closing their manufacturing operation in 60 days.

Confirm your scenario parameters:

Vendor name and category
Annual spend and volume
Dependency type (sole-source / no backup)
Current safety stock in days of production
Step 2; Exit Assessment​

Run the exit planning assessment:

/vendor-assess type:"exit-planning"
               vendor:"[Your vendor name from Exercise 1]"
               category:"[Category]"
               exit-trigger:"operational closure announced"
               timeline:"60 days"
               dependency:"sole-source"
               safety-stock:"[Current days of stock]"
               annual-volume:"[Your volume data]"


Review the output. Does it include:

 Immediate actions with Day 1-7 timeline
 Short-term mitigation for Days 8-30
 Transition plan for Days 31-60
 Communication requirements (internal and external)
 Financial exposure: outstanding orders, prepayments, tooling at risk

If any element is missing or unclear, prompt for it specifically.

Step 3; Emergency Sourcing Sprint​

Launch the emergency RFQ for the vacated category:

/vendor-assess type:"emergency-rfq"
               category:"[Category]"
               specification:"[Key technical requirements for this component/material]"
               timeline:"Qualified alternative needed within 45 days"
               volume:"[Monthly demand]"
               qualification-minimum:"ISO 9001, sample approval, capacity confirmation"


Review the potential alternatives list. For each candidate:

Is it a realistic alternative for your specific specification?
What is the fastest path to qualification?
What bridge arrangement terms are appropriate while qualification runs?
Step 4; Communication Plan​

Draft the three required communications:

Communication A: Internal brief

/vendor-communicate type:"internal-notice"
                    audience:"Operations Director, Head of Production, Finance Director"
                    subject:"Supply disruption — [Category]: [Vendor name] — 60-day closure"
                    situation:"[Vendor] has announced closure of manufacturing in 60 days"
                    current-stock:"[X days' production coverage]"
                    procurement-actions:"Exit assessment complete; emergency RFQ launched;
                                         alternative sources being contacted"
                    finance-actions:"Review outstanding POs and prepayments with [vendor]
                                     — [£X] at risk"
                    next-update:"[Date]"


Communication B: Transition notice to exiting vendor

/vendor-communicate type:"exit-notice"
                    vendor:"[Vendor name]"
                    contact:"[Vendor CEO or Operations Director]"
                    situation:"Acknowledge closure notification; formal transition process"
                    outstanding-orders:"[PO list with status — fulfil / cancel]"
                    tooling-recovery:"[List of company-owned assets at vendor premises
                                       with required return dates]"
                    documentation-transfer:"[Technical drawings, specifications, quality
                                            records — required by Day 30]"
                    transition-period:"[Date range]"


Communication C: Emergency outreach to alternative vendors

/vendor-communicate type:"emergency-rfq-outreach"
                    audience:"Procurement Director, [Potential alternative vendor name]"
                    category:"[Category]"
                    specification-summary:"[Key requirements — 3-5 lines]"
                    volume:"[Annual volume and monthly demand]"
                    timeline:"First sample delivery required within 45 days"
                    qualification-requirements:"[Your minimum approval criteria]"
                    contact:"[Your name, title, direct contact]"

Step 5; Post-Mortem​

After completing the exit planning scenario, answer these questions in writing:

Was this predictable? Review the history of this vendor in your classification register. Were there signals: declining OTD, financial news, quality issues: that existed before today? If your Vendor Health Monitor had been configured for this vendor, would it have flagged a warning in the past 90 days?

What monitoring would have given earlier warning? Identify the specific data point (financial news scan, OTD trend, Tier 2 supply signal) that would have provided 30-90 days of additional lead time. State the exact configuration change to the Vendor Health Monitor that would have surfaced it.

What structural change prevents recurrence? Write one specific, measurable action with a completion date:

"Qualify one alternative supplier for [category] within [X] days. Owner: [Name]. Success criteria: approved on vendor master; first sample received and passed."

Deliverable: Complete exit plan for the 60-day scenario including /vendor-assess exit planning output, emergency RFQ documentation, three drafted communications (internal, vendor transition, alternative vendor outreach), and a post-mortem with at least one specific structural change recommendation with owner and completion date.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Reproduce: Apply what you just learned to a simple case.

I need to build a vendor exit plan for the following scenario:

Vendor: MicroTech Components Ltd
Category: Custom-designed microcontrollers for our IoT product line
Annual spend: £340K
Dependency: Sole-source — no other manufacturer produces to our
            specification without an 18-month retooling process
Exit trigger: MicroTech has announced it is ceasing operations
              in the microcontroller market in 90 days to focus
              on different product lines.
Current safety stock: 6 weeks of production

Generate the exit plan: immediate actions (Days 1-7), short-term
mitigation (Days 8-30), transition plan (Days 31-90), and financial
exposure assessment.


What you are learning: The exit planning output reveals the dependency structure that should have driven earlier action. A sole-source dependency with an 18-month retooling timeline cannot be resolved in 90 days: the exit assessment produces a bridge-and-qualify strategy because the structural problem (no alternative) cannot be fixed within the exit window.

Adapt: Modify the scenario to match your organisation.

Identify the highest-risk vendor in your own organisation —
the one whose failure or exit would cause the greatest operational
disruption with the least mitigation available.

Build a hypothetical exit scenario for that vendor:
- What exit trigger is most likely (financial distress, quality
  failure, strategic decision)?
- What is your current safety stock position?
- What communication would you need to send internally within
  48 hours of notification?
- What structural change would have made this scenario significantly
  less urgent — and why hasn't it been done?


What you are learning: The most uncomfortable part of this exercise is the last question. Most procurement teams know which vendors they should have qualified an alternative for. The gap between knowing and acting is often visible to the CPO only when it is too late.

Apply: Extend to a new situation the lesson didn't cover directly.

Your Vendor Health Monitor sends an alert:
"PrecisionCast Ltd — your sole-source bottleneck vendor for
custom-cast housings — has had three consecutive weeks of OTD
below 80%. In the most recent week, OTD was 65%. No financial
news. No quality rejections. Partial deliveries have increased
to 45% of weekly shipments."

This is not an exit notification. The vendor has not announced
closure. But the operational pattern is concerning.

Answer: (1) Does this require exit planning to begin now?
(2) What is the first communication you send — and to whom?
(3) What procurement actions should be underway within 5 business
days of this alert?
(4) At what point (what signal) would this become a formal exit
scenario?


What you are learning: Exit planning begins before the exit notification arrives. When a Bottleneck vendor shows systematic operational decline, the responsible procurement action is to begin the alternative qualification process immediately: even if the vendor relationship has not formally ended. The goal is to have an alternative ready before you need it, not after.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 14: Capstone; End-to-End Procurement →
