Delegation as a Discipline

"Can you handle the analytics thing?"

This message will generate at least three follow-up questions: which analytics? by when? in what format? It may also generate a fourth, "who is the audience?" , and a fifth: "what decision does this support?" Each question consumes time from both people. If the answers are not given promptly, the delegatee either stalls or starts with assumptions that may require rework.

The total cost of this delegation, including the clarification cycle, the mental overhead, and the potential rework, likely exceeds the cost of writing a proper brief in the first place.

A delegation is only as good as its brief. A complete brief gives the delegatee everything they need to succeed without coming back to you. It respects their time, eliminates ambiguity, and allows them to work at full capacity rather than waiting for answers.

This lesson teaches the delegation quality standard: a seven-item checklist and a structured output format , and shows how /agentic-office:delegation generates delegation records with handoff communications calibrated to the delegatee's profile from work.local.md.

The Delegation Quality Checklist​

Before sending any delegation, verify these seven items are present:

#	Item	What Good Looks Like
1	Specific deliverable	Not an activity ("work on the analysis") but an output ("2-page investor-facing analytics summary, slides-ready format")
2	Named person	One person, not "the team." One person is accountable; others may contribute, but one delivers
3	Specific deadline	Not "when you can" or "ASAP": a date and time. "ASAP" produces the lowest-priority work on the delegatee's list
4	Context	Why this is needed; what decision it supports; who will see it
5	Format specified	Slides/doc/data/email/verbal, specific. "Data file" and "slides-ready charts" are different deliverables
6	Written in the delegatee's preferred style	Loaded from work.local.md; their channel preference, how they receive requests, what they find difficult
7	Follow-up mechanism defined	Confirmation window, check-in point, what happens if it goes overdue

Every item that is missing from the brief is a follow-up question the delegatee will have to ask. Write the brief; save the conversation.

The Delegation Record Format​

When you run /agentic-office:delegation, it produces a structured record. The structure ensures the checklist is met and the handoff communication is drafted:

DELEGATION RECORD — [Task name or ID]
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
Delegated to:  [Person name, from work.local.md if available]
Delegated by:  [Your name from work.local.md personal layer]
Date:          [Today]
Due:           [Specific date and time, not ASAP]

DELIVERABLE:
What:    [Precise description of what must be produced]
Format:  [Slides / doc / data / email / verbal, specific]
Length:  [If relevant, 2-page; 10 slides; 500 words]

CONTEXT:
Purpose:   [Why this is needed; what decision it supports]
Audience:  [Who will see/use this output]
Key question the output should answer: [The most important question]

CONSTRAINTS:
What not to do: [Any specific exclusions or out-of-scope items]
Prior work:     [Any existing documents or decisions to build from]

HANDOFF COMMUNICATION (ready to send):
[Draft message in the delegatee's preferred channel and style,
 loaded from work.local.md person entry]

FOLLOW-UP PLAN:
Confirmation due:  [Time, typically EOD today for same-week tasks]
Check-in:          [If no confirmation: follow up at this time]
Escalation:        [If no delivery by [date - N days]: flag in digest]
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════


The record has three distinct sections. The deliverable section meets checklist items 1, 2, 3, and 5, what, who, when, and format. The context section meets checklist item 4: why this exists and who it is for. The handoff communication meets checklist item 6: the message itself, calibrated to the person. The follow-up plan meets checklist item 7: the confirmation window and check-in schedule.

Handoff Communication Calibration​

The handoff message is where the delegation quality standard intersects with the people memory you built in Lesson 4. The skill loads the delegatee's person entry from work.local.md and calibrates the message accordingly.

The calibration changes four things:

Channel. Omar prefers Slack DM for routine requests; email for formal ones. Ayesha prefers written briefs. Dr. Sana Mirza prefers formal written communication for proposals. The skill selects the channel based on the person entry.

Tone and structure. Someone who is detail-oriented receives more context than someone who is an executive who prefers bullet points. The same brief, different wrapper.

Lead time acknowledgement. If the person entry notes "dislikes last-minute asks," the message explicitly acknowledges the timeline and offers to adjust scope if needed. This is not apology; it is professional courtesy.

Scope specificity. If the person entry notes "will push back on scope creep, be specific," the message defines scope precisely and leaves nothing open-ended.

The result: the same task, delegated to two different people, produces two different messages. Not because the task changed, but because the people are different.

The Worked Example: Delegating the Analytics Brief to Omar​
/agentic-office:delegation
> Delegate the analytics brief to Omar. He needs to produce a 2-page
  investor-facing analytics summary covering:
  - Student completion rates Q1 2026 vs Q1 2025
  - Revenue per student trend, last 4 quarters
  - Q1 cohort retention at 30/60/90 days
  Needed for the investor deck on 22 March 2026.
  Format: slides-ready data, charts preferred over tables.
  Audience: sophisticated investors who will probe on retention trends.


Sample delegation output:

DELEGATION RECORD, TASK-002: Analytics Brief (Investor Deck)
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
Delegated to:  Omar Farooq, Head of Analytics
Delegated by:  Zia Khan
Date:          17 March 2026
Due:           22 March 2026 by 17:00 PKT

DELIVERABLE:
What:    2-page investor-facing analytics summary
Format:  Slides-ready data, charts preferred over tables
Length:  2 pages / equivalent slide content
Content:
  1. Student completion rates, Q1 2026 vs Q1 2025
  2. Revenue per student trend, last 4 quarters
  3. Cohort retention, Q1 2026 cohort at 30/60/90 days

CONTEXT:
Purpose:   Investor deck presentation, 22 March 2026
Audience:  Sophisticated investors; data-literate; will probe on trends
Key question: "Is retention improving? What is driving it?"

CONSTRAINTS:
Scope:    These three data points only, do not add commentary or context
Format:   No prose; slides-ready data only
Prior work: Build from existing Q1 data pipeline output where available

HANDOFF COMMUNICATION (ready to send):
  Draft Slack message to Omar:

  "Omar, can I ask for your help on a time-sensitive piece?
  I need a 2-page analytics summary for an investor deck by 22 March.
  Specifically: Q1 student completion rates vs prior year; revenue
  per student trend (last 4Q); Q1 cohort retention at 30/60/90 days.
  Format: slides-ready, charts rather than tables where possible.
  The deck audience is sophisticated investors who will probe
  on retention trends: the key question is whether retention
  is improving and what is driving it.
  I know this is a tight window, let me know if the scope needs
  adjusting or if there are any data availability issues. Can you
  confirm receipt by EOD today?"

FOLLOW-UP PLAN:
Confirmation due:  17 March 2026 by 17:00 PKT (EOD today)
Check-in:          20 March 2026 (midpoint), any blockers?
Escalation:        If no delivery by 21 March: flag in digest;
                   consider scope reduction or taking back
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Reading the Calibration​

Three things in the handoff message reflect Omar's person entry specifically:

"I know this is a tight window, let me know if the scope needs adjusting." This comes from the note: "dislikes last-minute asks." The message does not apologise for the timeline ; it acknowledges it and offers a practical response (adjust scope).

The scope is hyper-specific. Three data points, no commentary, slides-ready format, no prose. This comes from the note: "will push back on scope creep, be specific about what you need." There is nothing open-ended in the brief.

"Can you confirm receipt by EOD today?" The confirmation request is explicit and time-bound. Omar's entry notes that data requests need lead time: a confirmation window ensures the delegation is live rather than silently sitting in his queue.

If this same delegation were sent to Ayesha instead, the message would change. Ayesha is a new starter who prefers written briefs with structured context. The message would include more background ("this is for an investor deck on Saturday: the purpose is..."), be formatted as a written brief rather than a conversational Slack message, and include more explicit context about the audience and decision being made. Same task; different wrapper.

The Follow-up Protocol​

A delegation without a follow-up mechanism is a delegation that may silently fail. The protocol sets expectations at three points:

Confirmation window. The delegatee confirms they have received the delegation and understood the brief. This is not a status update; it is a check that the message landed and the scope is agreed.

Same-week tasks: confirmation by EOD the same day
Longer tasks: confirmation within 48 hours

If no confirmation arrives within the window, send a single gentle follow-up. If still no response after the second contact, flag it to the Work Tracker agent for surfacing in the next digest.

In-progress check-ins. The cadence depends on the task duration:

Tasks under five days: one check-in at the midpoint
Tasks five to fourteen days: weekly check-in
Tasks over fourteen days: bi-weekly check-in

Check-ins are not status reports. They are a single question: "Any blockers I can help with?" The delegatee should be able to answer in one sentence.

Overdue handling.

Delay	Action
1 day late	Polite inquiry: "Any blockers I can help with?"
3 days late	Explicit conversation: "This is affecting [downstream item]. What do you need?"
1 week late	Flag in digest; consider rerouting or taking the task back

The escalation at three days is explicit, "this is affecting [downstream item]", because a delegatee may not know that their delay is blocking something else. Naming the impact is not a complaint; it is context that enables them to prioritise appropriately.

The Delegation Log​

Every delegation is logged in work.local.md under the delegations section:

delegations:
  - task: "Analytics brief, investor deck"
    delegated_to: "Omar Farooq"
    delegated_by: "Zia Khan"
    date_delegated: "2026-03-17"
    due_date: "2026-03-22"
    confirmed: false
    status: "PENDING CONFIRMATION"
    deliverable: "2-page investor-facing analytics summary"


The status lifecycle: PENDING CONFIRMATION → IN PROGRESS → COMPLETE / OVERDUE.

The log matters for two reasons. First, the daily digest and Work Tracker agent read from it; they surface delegations that are approaching their deadlines or have gone overdue. Second, it prevents the common failure mode of forgetting what you have delegated and to whom. A delegation that falls out of your awareness is a delegation that will fail silently.

A DELEGATION IS NOT COMPLETE WHEN SENT

The delegation log entry closes only when the deliverable is received and meets the standard. "Sent" is not "done." The log stays PENDING CONFIRMATION until Omar replies. It stays IN PROGRESS until he delivers. It moves to COMPLETE only when the 2-page brief is received and verified. Until then, it remains an open item.

Exercise: Delegation Sprint​

Time: 35 minutes Plugin command: /agentic-office:delegation

Step 1: Identify tasks from Lesson 6 that should be delegated (5 minutes)​

Return to the prioritised task list from Lesson 6. The task-intelligence output flagged delegation candidates, tasks where another person is better placed to execute, where you should be the decision-maker rather than the doer. Identify at least two to three tasks to delegate.

For each one, confirm: is the delegatee in your Layer 2 people entries? If not, add them before proceeding.

Step 2: Create delegation records (20 minutes)​

For each task, run:

/agentic-office:delegation
> Delegate [task description] to [person].
  They need to [describe the deliverable, specific and measurable].
  Due: [specific date and time].
  Format: [what format the output should take].
  Context: [why this is needed; what decision it supports; who sees it].
  Constraints: [what is out of scope; any existing work to build from].


Review each delegation record. Go through the seven-item checklist explicitly:

Is the deliverable specific? (not an activity, but an output)
Is one named person accountable?
Is the deadline a date and time, not "ASAP"?
Is the context (purpose + audience) included?
Is the format specified?
Does the handoff message reflect the delegatee's communication style?
Is the follow-up mechanism defined?

For any item where the answer is no, provide the missing information and regenerate.

Step 3: Evaluate the handoff messages (10 minutes)​

For each delegation record, read the handoff message and ask: "Would the delegatee succeed without coming back to me?" If not, identify the specific question they would ask , and answer it in the brief before sending.

Deliverable: Two to three complete delegation records with calibrated handoff messages, all seven checklist items met, and follow-up windows defined. At least one record where you identified a gap and strengthened the brief before finalising.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Use these prompts in Cowork or your preferred AI assistant.

Reproduce: Delegate the analytics brief to Omar using the quality standard.

I need to delegate a task to Omar Farooq. His communication profile:
- Prefers data-backed requests and specific scope
- Dislikes last-minute asks, acknowledge the timeline
- Best channel: Slack DM for routine requests
- Will push back on scope creep, be hyper-specific

The task: produce a 2-page investor-facing analytics summary covering
Q1 student completion rates vs prior year; revenue per student (last
4 quarters); Q1 cohort retention at 30/60/90 days. Format: slides-ready
data, charts preferred. Due 22 March 2026 by 17:00 PKT. Audience:
sophisticated investors who will probe on retention trends.

Produce a complete delegation record using this format:
- Delegated to, date, due date
- Deliverable (what, format, length)
- Context (purpose, audience, key question)
- Constraints (what not to do)
- Handoff communication (Slack message calibrated to Omar's profile)
- Follow-up plan (confirmation window, check-in, overdue handling)

Then go through the 7-item delegation quality checklist and confirm
each item is present.


What you are learning: The handoff message should show three specific calibrations to Omar's profile: lead time acknowledgement, hyper-specific scope, and a confirmation request. If any are missing, the person entry was not fully loaded. This exercise makes the calibration mechanism visible.

Adapt: Delegate a real task to someone in your own work.local.md.

I want to delegate a real task from my current work.
Here is the task: [describe the task: what needs to be done]
The delegatee: [describe their role and communication style,
  or reference their person entry if already in memory]

Using the 7-item delegation quality checklist, produce a complete
delegation record with:
- Specific deliverable (not an activity)
- Named person (one person, accountable)
- Firm deadline (date and time)
- Context (purpose + audience + key question)
- Format specified
- Handoff message calibrated to their communication style
- Follow-up plan (confirmation window + check-in cadence)

After producing the record, identify the weakest item in the brief.
What would make it stronger?


What you are learning: Applying the delegation standard to a real task reveals the common weak points: context is often underspecified (the delegatee does not know why this matters), format is often assumed rather than stated, and follow-up mechanisms are often missing entirely. Identifying the weakest item trains the calibration judgment that makes future delegations stronger from the start.

Apply: Audit a delegation that went wrong.

I want to analyse a delegation that did not go well, either one
I sent or one I received. Here is what happened:

[Describe the delegation: what was asked, how it was asked,
what went wrong, came back with questions, rework required,
deadline missed, misunderstood scope]

Go through the 7-item delegation quality checklist for this
delegation. For each missing item, explain what question
the delegatee had to ask (or should have asked) as a result.

Then rewrite the delegation using the quality standard.
What would the original message have looked like if it had
met all seven items?


What you are learning: Retrospective analysis of a failed delegation is one of the fastest ways to internalise the quality standard. Mapping each failure point to a missing checklist item shows that most delegation failures are predictable , and preventable. The rewrite exercise demonstrates the difference between the delegation that generated rework and the one that would not have.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 8: The Daily Digest →
