The Daily Digest

There is a version of Monday morning that most senior professionals know too well: arriving at the desk and spending the first 45 minutes scanning emails, checking which delegations have received responses, pulling up the project tracker to see what changed over the weekend, reviewing the calendar to see who needs prep, and then, finally, starting actual work.

The single highest-leverage productivity habit for any senior professional is replacing that 45 minutes with a 5-minute read. The Daily Digest is the agentic morning briefing: assembled automatically from your calendar, project memory, delegation log, task list, and; if configured, email and Slack, then presented as a structured brief you can review before your first coffee is finished.

This lesson walks through how the digest is assembled, what each section contains, why the tone matters as much as the content, and how to configure your own digest in work.local.md. The Monday and Friday variants round out the lesson, because start-of-week and end-of-week serve genuinely different cognitive needs.

What the Digest Replaces​

Before configuring anything, it helps to name precisely what the digest eliminates. A typical morning information-gathering routine for a senior professional in a multi-project role involves:

Manual Step	Approximate Time	Replaced By
Scanning flagged emails	10-15 minutes	Digest: Flagged from Yesterday
Checking calendar for meeting prep	5-10 minutes	Digest: Today's Calendar
Reviewing project statuses	10-15 minutes	Digest: This Week at a Glance
Checking delegation follow-ups	5-10 minutes	Digest: Open Delegations Status
Recalling weekly priorities	5 minutes	Digest: Weekly Priorities Reminder

Industry surveys suggest that knowledge workers spend 30-60 minutes each morning in this gathering mode before productive work begins. The digest compresses this to the time it takes to read one page.

Digest Assembly Sources​

The digest pulls from a priority-ordered stack of sources. Sources higher in the stack are always included; sources lower in the stack require MCP configuration and are optional.

Priority	Source	What It Provides	Requires
1	work.local.md	Projects, priorities, open delegations, people context	Always available
2	Google Calendar (MCP)	Today's meetings; upcoming deadlines from calendar events	Calendar MCP
3	Task management (MCP)	Open tasks; overdue items from Notion, Linear, or similar	Task tool MCP
4	Gmail (MCP)	Flagged and unread items requiring response	Gmail MCP
5	Slack (MCP)	@mentions; flagged messages; urgent direct messages	Slack MCP
6	Domain agent feeds	Key metrics from finance, HR, operations agents	Agent integrations

The digest works with work.local.md alone ; it simply produces a lighter brief focused on projects, priorities, and delegations, without the calendar and communication layers. Readers without MCP connections should configure the digest and generate it from work.local.md first; MCP sources can be added later.

Digest Output Structure​

A well-designed digest has eight sections, each with a specific purpose and a specific length constraint.

Headline Status: the first line. One of three states: CLEAR RUNWAY (all on track), WATCH ITEMS (something needs attention), or CRITICAL ITEM(S) (immediate action required). A busy executive scans this first and decides how to approach the rest of the brief.

Today's Critical Path: maximum 5 items, ordered by importance rather than urgency. These are the items where a slip today has downstream consequences. Not everything due this week, only what must happen today.

Today's Calendar: only meetings that require preparation or attention. A 30-minute standing meeting with a known agenda does not need an entry. A meeting where you are presenting a recommendation does.

Open Delegations Status: what you are waiting for. This is the most commonly forgotten category in manual task management. The digest surfaces it every morning so nothing silently falls through.

Flagged from Yesterday: items from yesterday that remain live or need action today. The link between days.

This Week at a Glance: the shape of the week in 5-6 lines. Not every item, just the anchors. What does Tuesday look like compared to Thursday?

Upcoming Deadlines: the next 7-14 days only. Not the full calendar horizon. This keeps the section scannable and prevents the digest from becoming a planning document.

Weekly Priorities Reminder: your Boulders or equivalent for the week. Daily urgency reliably hijacks weekly importance. This section anchors every morning's brief to what actually matters at the weekly level.

The Sample Daily Digest: Zia's Wednesday Brief​

Here is a full digest for a Wednesday in March 2026, assembled from the Panaversity work.local.md and the configured MCP sources.

DAILY DIGEST, Wednesday, 19 March 2026, Zia Khan
Prepared: 07:00 PKT
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
GOOD MORNING. Here is today's brief.

── TODAY'S CRITICAL PATH ───────────────────────────────────
  1. 🔴 Project Nighthawk: escalation, facility status overdue (10 days)
     Action: Contact liaison by 09:00; if no response, escalate to COO
  2. Chapter 39 draft, due Thursday (tomorrow)
     Status: In progress, final section outstanding
  3. Review Ayesha's first analysis, do this today; she is in her onboarding window
  4. Confirm Omar received delegation for analytics brief

── TODAY'S CALENDAR ────────────────────────────────────────
  09:00, Executive Weekly (30 min standing; 3 agenda items to confirm before)
  11:00, Chapter Review call (bi-weekly; Chapter 27 close-out)
  15:00. No meetings; deep work block (Chapter 39 completion)

── OPEN DELEGATIONS STATUS ─────────────────────────────────
  ⏳ Omar Farooq, Analytics investor brief, due 24 March
     Status: Delegated yesterday; no confirmation received
     Action: Chase confirmation if not received by 10:00 today

  ⏳ Compliance, BSI ISO 27001 renewal, due this week
     Status: Delegated; no update received

── FLAGGED FROM YESTERDAY ──────────────────────────────────
  • Ayesha's analysis sent Monday, review before her confidence fades
  • Project Nighthawk: 10 days without facility update, escalation today, not tomorrow

── THIS WEEK AT A GLANCE ───────────────────────────────────
  Today (Wed):  Nighthawk escalation; Omar confirmation; Ayesha review
  Thu:          Chapter 39 filed; Chapter 39 skills library
  Fri:          Executive Weekly prep sent; week close
  Mon:          Executive Weekly 09:00; Dr. Sana Mirza joining

── UPCOMING DEADLINES ──────────────────────────────────────
  Thu 20 Mar:   Chapter 39 narrative draft
  Mon 24 Mar:   Omar's analytics brief (investor deck)
  Sat 29 Mar:   Workshop #7 content review (7-day window opens)
  31 Mar:       Project Nighthawk, latest date for facility agreement
                to keep Q3 launch viable

── WEEKLY PRIORITIES REMINDER ──────────────────────────────
  This week's Boulders:
  1. Complete Chapter 39 (AgentFactory, P1)
  2. Resolve Project Nighthawk facility blocker (P2)
  3. Investor analytics brief delivered via Omar (P2)
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Reading the Digest Well​

Three things to notice in this output:

The critical path is a decision, not a list. Four items, not everything due this week. Chapter 29 planning is not there. Workshop #7 content is not there. They are in the upcoming deadlines section, where they belong.

The flagged items have voice. "Ayesha's analysis sent Monday, review before her confidence fades." This is not system language. It is briefing language: the output of someone who understands context, not just data. "Project Nighthawk: 10 days without facility update, escalation today, not tomorrow" carries urgency without listing a status code.

The delegation section is the safety net. Two items are tracked here. If Omar had confirmed receipt, the first entry would show "Confirmed, in progress." The absence of confirmation is the signal. Missing this for two mornings in a row is what causes delegations to fail silently.

Digest Length and Tone Rules​

The digest has one non-negotiable constraint: it must fit on one page. Not "aim for one page": one page. If it exceeds this, items are being included that do not belong in the morning brief. They belong in the dashboard (for weekly review) or the task list (for full inventory).

Specific limits per section:

Section	Maximum
Critical path	5 items
Calendar	4 entries (only meetings needing prep)
Open delegations	All overdue or unconfirmed (no limit, but flag these)
Flagged from yesterday	3-4 items
This week at a glance	5 days (1 line each)
Upcoming deadlines	7-14 day window only (5-7 items)
Weekly priorities	3 items

The tone rule is equally important. Here is the same item in two voices:

System voice: "Project Nighthawk: status; no update for 10 days. Action required: escalate."

Briefing voice: "Nighthawk has been quiet for 10 days, escalation today, not tomorrow."

The information is identical. The cognitive load is not. System voice requires the reader to decode, interpret, and decide. Briefing voice delivers the interpretation ready to act on. A good digest reads like a knowledgeable colleague briefed you before you arrived, not like a system generated a report.

Monday and Friday Variants​

The standard daily digest works for Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. Monday and Friday have different cognitive demands that warrant structural changes.

Monday Variant: Week-Ahead Brief​

Monday is planning mode. Add two sections:

This Week's Critical Path: the 3-5 things that, if done this week, make the week a success. Different from the daily critical path: this is the weekly frame, not the daily sequence.

Open from Last Week: anything that carried over from Friday and why. Not as judgment ("you did not finish this") but as information ("this is still live, here is where it stands").

The Monday digest is typically longer than a standard digest. This is acceptable because the reader has not yet committed to the day's schedule and has time for a fuller picture.

Friday Variant: Week Close​

Friday is closing mode. Replace "This Week at a Glance" with a Week Close section:

Completed this week: What was delivered. Name the outputs, Chapter 39 filed, analytics brief delegated to Omar, Executive Weekly run. Celebrating progress is not soft; it is data.
Carries forward: What did not complete, and why. No judgment, just context for Monday.
Set up for Monday: Things that will be easier if done today. Sending the Executive Weekly agenda before Friday afternoon means attendees have the weekend to prepare.

The Friday digest helps avoid the "Monday amnesia" problem: the gap between Friday evening and Monday morning that causes context to be lost and priorities to need rebuilding from scratch.

Configuring Your Digest​

The digest is configured in the digest: section of work.local.md. Here is the Panaversity configuration:

digest:
  schedule: "07:00 PKT, daily weekdays"
  sections:
    - critical_path
    - calendar
    - open_delegations
    - flagged_from_yesterday
    - week_at_a_glance
    - upcoming_deadlines
    - weekly_priorities
  critical_path_items: 4 # Maximum items in the critical path section
  escalation_threshold: "Any item blocked for >7 days → flag as critical"
  format: "5-minute read; action-oriented; briefing voice, not system voice"
  monday_variant: true # Add This Week's Critical Path + Open from Last Week
  friday_variant: true # Replace week-at-a-glance with Week Close
  sources:
    - work.local.md # Always included
    - google_calendar # Requires Calendar MCP
    - gmail_flagged # Requires Gmail MCP (optional)
    - slack_mentions # Requires Slack MCP (optional)


Adjust critical_path_items based on your role density. If you have five or more P1 projects, you may need a hard limit of 3 in the critical path section to preserve readability. If your role is primarily one major initiative, 5 is fine.

The escalation_threshold is the trigger for turning an item from standard to flagged. Seven days without movement on a delegation is the default, adjust to match your organisation's tempo.

Exercise: Configure and Generate Your First Digest​

Type: Applied Configuration + Review Time: 35 minutes Plugin command: /agentic-office:digest Goal: Configure, generate, and refine your personalised daily digest

Step 1: Define Your Morning Needs (10 minutes)​

Before opening work.local.md, answer these four questions:

What do you most need to know at the start of each day that you currently find out by scanning multiple places?
What is your maximum comfortable digest length? (Set this as your quality bar)
Which external tools do you use that could be connected via MCP? (Calendar? Email? Task tracker?)
Do you have a consistent weekly meeting rhythm that should shape the Monday/Friday variants?

These answers inform your configuration choices.

Step 2: Configure work.local.md (10 minutes)​

Fill in the digest configuration section. At minimum:

schedule:: when you want the digest generated (time and timezone)
sections:, which of the eight sections you want
critical_path_items:; your maximum (3-5)
escalation_threshold:: how many days before a stalled item is flagged critical
format:; your quality reminder to the skill
Step 3: Generate Your First Digest (5 minutes)​

Run the command:

/agentic-office:digest


Read the output. Do not evaluate yet, just read.

Step 4: Review and Refine (10 minutes)​

Apply the quality criteria:

Length: Does it fit on one page? If not, what would you remove?
Tone: Does it read like a briefing or a status report? Find one item to rewrite in briefing voice.
Priorities: Does the critical path reflect what actually matters today, or is it a list of everything due soon?
Missing: What did you expect to see that is not there? (This is your work.local.md gap list.)

Run /agentic-office:digest a second time after making one configuration change. Compare the outputs.

Deliverable: A configured digest in work.local.md, a first generated digest, and a one-paragraph review noting what you would change and why.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Use these prompts in Cowork or your preferred AI assistant.

Reproduce: Generate Zia's Wednesday digest using the case study data.

Generate a daily digest for Wednesday, 19 March 2026 for Zia Khan,
CEO of Panaversity. Use this context:

Projects:
- AgentFactory (P1): Chapter 39 draft due Thursday; Chapter 39 skills
  library also due Thursday as separate deliverable
- Project Nighthawk (P2): Karachi expansion; facility agreement stalled
  for 10+ days; Q3 target at risk; no update for 10 days
- BankersAI (P2): Workshop #7 coming; content review due 7 days before

Open delegations:
- Omar Farooq: analytics investor brief, delegated yesterday;
  no confirmation received; due 24 March
- Compliance: BSI ISO 27001 renewal, delegated last week; no update

Calendar today:
- 09:00 Executive Weekly (30 min standing; 3 agenda items needed)
- 11:00 Chapter Review (bi-weekly; Chapter 27 close-out)
- 15:00 deep work block (Chapter 39 completion)

Upcoming: Dr. Sana Mirza joins Monday 23 March as Head of Curriculum.

Format: One page maximum. Briefing voice, not system voice.
Include all eight sections from the digest output structure.
Critical path: maximum 4 items.


What you are learning: Building the digest prompt manually makes the assembly logic visible. You can see which context came from which source, calendar from the calendar MCP, delegation status from the delegation log, critical path from task intelligence. Once you can build it manually, you understand what the /agentic-office:digest command is doing automatically.

Adapt: Configure and generate your own digest.

I want to configure a daily digest for my own work. Here is my context:

Role: [Your role and organisation]
Projects: [List your 2-3 active projects with priority and current status]
Open delegations: [Who are you waiting on, for what, by when]
Meetings today: [Your actual calendar today]
Weekly priorities: [Your top 2-3 priorities this week]

Generate a daily digest using this context. Format it to fit one page.
Use briefing voice; write as a knowledgeable colleague would brief me,
not as a system generating a status report.

Then tell me: what would I need to add to work.local.md to make this
digest generate automatically each morning?


What you are learning: The gap between what the digest produces and what you expected reveals what is missing from your work.local.md. Every "I expected to see X but it was not there" is a configuration task. This is the feedback loop that makes the digest better each week.

Apply: Generate a Friday week-close digest.

It is Friday, 21 March 2026, end of Zia Khan's work week at Panaversity.
Generate a Friday variant of the daily digest using the week-close format.

What was completed this week:
- Project Nighthawk escalation letter sent (Wednesday)
- Omar confirmed analytics brief delegation (Wednesday)
- Chapter 39 narrative draft filed (Thursday)

What carries forward:
- Chapter 39 skills library, 60% complete; Omar to deliver analytics
  brief Monday
- BSI ISO renewal, compliance owner following up; expected by Wednesday

Set up for Monday:
- Executive Weekly agenda needs to be sent (so attendees can prepare)
- Dr. Sana Mirza starts Monday, onboarding brief needed before 09:00

Generate the Friday digest with the Week Close section replacing
"This Week at a Glance". Include a "What Carries Forward" section
with a note on why each item did not complete this week (information,
not judgment).


What you are learning: The Friday digest serves a different cognitive mode than the daily digest. It closes the week, captures progress (which is motivating and useful for reporting), and prepares the following Monday without requiring you to rebuild context from scratch. The quality of your Monday morning directly depends on the quality of your Friday close.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 9: Meeting Intelligence →
