The Executive Dashboard

Every work function in this book has its own reporting. The finance agent from Chapter 28 produces management accounts. HR domain agents (Chapter 37, planned) surface headcount and onboarding status. The operations intelligence layer (Chapter 38, planned) generates compliance dashboards. The Chapter 34 revenue engine has a pipeline view. A senior executive reviewing all of these would spend hours each week simply gathering information before making a single decision.

The executive dashboard collapses this into a single view: one structured, always-current picture of every work stream that matters, assembled from domain agents and project memory, formatted for a 5-minute review rather than a 30-minute deep dive.

This lesson builds the executive dashboard and its weekly project status companion. Before configuring either, it is worth clarifying what the executive dashboard is not, because there is already a visual dashboard in this system, and the two serve entirely different purposes.

Two Dashboards, Two Purposes​

When you installed the official productivity plugin in Lesson 2, you gained access to dashboard.html: a visual task board that renders your TASKS.md as interactive cards. When you install the custom agentic-office plugin, you gain access to the executive dashboard generated by /agentic-office:progress-tracker.

These are complementary tools, not competing ones.

Dimension	Official Plugin dashboard.html	Custom Plugin Executive Dashboard
Purpose	Individual task management	Cross-domain portfolio briefing
User	You, managing your own tasks	You (or your manager), reviewing overall status
Format	Visual board, drag-and-drop task cards	Text-based, RAG status, sections, structured briefing
Time horizon	Today and this week	This week and the next 2-4 weeks
Content	All tasks in TASKS.md	P1/P2 projects only; this week's actions only
Domain scope	Your individual task list	All deployed domain agents + project memory
When to use	Managing task CRUD (add/complete/move tasks)	Strategic weekly review; reporting; decision support
Interaction	Interactive (click, drag, edit)	Read-only briefing output

Use dashboard.html when you want to interact with your task list. Use the executive dashboard when you want to understand the overall picture and communicate it.

A PRACTICAL DISTINCTION

The 5-minute test for the executive dashboard: could you forward it to your manager as a weekly status update with no editing? If yes, it is working. You would never forward dashboard.html to your manager that is a personal productivity tool, not a communication artefact.

Dashboard Output Structure​

The executive dashboard has seven sections, each with a specific purpose.

Headline Status: the executive summary in one line. RED (action required), AMBER (watch items), or GREEN (all clear). Aggregates the worst-case RAG status across all tracked projects. If any project is RED, the headline is RED.

P1 Projects: your primary initiatives with RAG status, current milestone, risk flag, and this week's required action. One entry per P1 project. Brief. This is not a project brief; it is a status signal.

P2 Projects: same format, briefer. Projects that matter this week but are not primary initiatives.

Key Metrics (from domain agents): one metric per domain you have configured. Only domains with deployed agents appear. This section makes cross-domain status visible in one view.

Open Actions (this week): only actions due this week or overdue. Not the full action log, only what requires attention now.

Open Delegations: who you are waiting on, for what, by when. The delegation safety net.

Upcoming Decisions: decisions that will need to be made in the next 1-2 weeks. Surfaces them before the meeting where they will be discussed.

Calendar Highlights: the most important events this week. Not every calendar item, only the ones that matter for planning.

The Sample Executive Dashboard: Zia's Weekly View​

Here is the executive dashboard for the week of 17 March 2026, generated after the Monday Executive Weekly.

EXECUTIVE DASHBOARD. Week of 17 March 2026, Zia Khan / Panaversity
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
HEADLINE STATUS: 🔴 ACTION REQUIRED, Project Nighthawk hard blocker

── P1 PROJECTS ─────────────────────────────────────────────
  AgentFactory (Book)              🟡 ON TRACK / WATCH
  This week:   Chapter 28 narrative draft due Thursday;
               skills library due Thursday (separate deliverable, do not miss)
  Risk:        Two deliverables on same deadline, skills library is
               at risk if Chapter 28 narrative runs long
  Action:      File Chapter 28 narrative by Wednesday to protect Thursday buffer

── P2 PROJECTS ─────────────────────────────────────────────
  Project Nighthawk (Karachi Expansion)   🔴 HARD BLOCKER
  This week:   Formal letter to facility owner (Zia, due Wed 19 March)
  Blocker:     Facility agreement, 10+ days no response, STALE BLOCKER
  Impact:      Q3 launch at risk if agreement not signed by 31 March
  Action:      Letter by Wednesday; COO escalation if no response by 26 March

  BankersAI (Workshops)            🟢 ON TRACK
  This week:   No immediate action, Workshop #7 content review opens 29 March
  Next:        Content review due before Workshop #7 (7-day window)

── KEY METRICS (from domain agents) ────────────────────────
  HR:          Ayesha Raza, Day 4 of onboarding; 30-day check-in: 14 April
               Dr. Sana Mirza, joins Monday 23 March; onboarding brief needed
  Finance:     Analytics budget, approved in principle; ROI brief due Mon 24 March
  Operations:  BSI ISO 27001 renewal, follow-up delegated; awaiting response
               ERP migration, in progress; analytics tooling compatibility TBC

── OPEN ACTIONS (this week) ────────────────────────────────
  ☐ Formal letter to Nighthawk facility owner, Zia Khan, Wed 19 March
  ☐ Chapter 28 narrative draft, Zia Khan, Thu 20 March
  ☐ Chapter 28 skills library, Zia Khan, Thu 20 March

── OPEN DELEGATIONS ────────────────────────────────────────
  Omar Farooq:  Analytics ROI brief, due Mon 24 March — ⏳ confirmed
  Compliance:   BSI ISO 27001 renewal. This week — ⏳ no update

── UPCOMING DECISIONS ──────────────────────────────────────
  Mon 24 March:  Analytics budget final sign-off (after Omar's ROI brief)
  Post-Nighthawk: Islamabad workshop expansion, deferred; trigger: Nighthawk resolved

── CALENDAR HIGHLIGHTS ─────────────────────────────────────
  Wed 19 March:  Chapter Review (bi-weekly; Chapter 27 close-out)
  Thu 20 March:  Chapter 28 deadline
  Mon 23 March:  Dr. Sana Mirza starts; Executive Weekly
  Mon 24 March:  Analytics ROI brief review + budget decision
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Reading the Dashboard​

Three things to notice:

The headline status is RED because of Project Nighthawk. AgentFactory being AMBER would not trigger a RED headline, AMBER means watch, not act. But a P2 project with a hard blocker that has now become stale (10+ days) makes the overall picture RED. The headline aggregates the worst case, not the average.

AgentFactory is AMBER despite being on track for Chapter 28. The skills library is a separate deliverable due the same day. Two deliverables on the same deadline creates risk even if each is individually manageable. The dashboard surfaces this ; it would not be visible in a simple task list.

The key metrics section bridges domain agents. HR context (Ayesha Day 4, Dr. Sana Mirza joining Monday), Finance context (analytics budget in flight), Operations context (ERP migration, BSI renewal). This section answers the question "what do I need to know from other parts of the organisation this week?" without opening five separate domain agent views.

RAG Status Rules​

RAG status is rule-based, not subjective. Apply these three rules in order:

GREEN, All on track: All milestones on schedule. No blockers. No overdue decisions. Nothing requires your attention this week beyond normal execution.

AMBER, Watch: At least one of: a milestone at risk (slippage is possible), a minor blocker (workaround exists), or a decision needed this week. Amber means the situation needs monitoring; you may need to act, but it is not yet critical.

RED, Action required: At least one of: a milestone missed, a hard blocker (progress cannot continue), or a decision overdue. Red means act now, not monitor.

THE MILESTONE-SLIP RULE

Never show GREEN for a project where a milestone has slipped without explicit acknowledgement. Even if the team is working on a recovery plan and you expect to be back on track next week: the slip happened. Acknowledge it (move to AMBER at minimum, RED if the slip puts the end target at risk), reforecast, and then return to GREEN once the reforecast is confirmed delivered. Showing GREEN while a slip is unacknowledged erodes trust in the dashboard.

Weekly Project Status​

Before generating the full executive dashboard, run the weekly project status to get the per-project RAG assessment and critical path:

/agentic-office:progress-tracker
> type: weekly-status


Sample Weekly Project Status:

WEEKLY PROJECT STATUS. Week of 17 March 2026
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
── AgentFactory (P1) ───────────────────────────────────────
Status:           🟡 ON TRACK / WATCH
This week:        Chapter 28 narrative draft + skills library (both due Thursday)
Next:             Chapter 29 planning, starts Monday 24 March
Risk:             Two deliverables on same deadline; skills library at risk
                  if narrative runs long
This week's action: File Chapter 28 narrative by Wednesday to protect Thursday
Open delegations: None for this project

── Project Nighthawk (P2) ─────────────────────────────────
Status:           🔴 HARD BLOCKER
This week:        Formal letter to facility owner (Zia, due Wednesday)
Next:             Facility response expected within 5 business days of letter
Risk:             Q3 launch date at risk if response not received by 26 March
This week's action: Write and send formal letter today (Wednesday)
Open delegations: None. This is a direct escalation item

── BankersAI (P2) ─────────────────────────────────────────
Status:           🟢 ON TRACK
This week:        No action needed, next window is content review (opens 29 March)
Next:             Workshop #7 content review, 7-day window begins 29 March
Risk:             None this week
This week's action: Calendar note, set content review reminder for 29 March

── CRITICAL PATH (this week) ──────────────────────────────
  1. Nighthawk formal letter, Zia, Wednesday 19 March
  2. Chapter 28 narrative draft, Zia, Thursday 20 March
  3. Chapter 28 skills library, Zia, Thursday 20 March
  4. Omar confirmation on analytics brief, chase by 10:00 today

── BLOCKERS ────────────────────────────────────────────────
  🔴 Project Nighthawk: Facility agreement, STALE BLOCKER (10+ days)
     Owner of resolution: Zia Khan (formal letter); facility liaison
     Escalation: If no response by Wednesday 26 March → COO escalation
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Blocker Classification​

The progress-tracker skill classifies blockers into three types, each with a different escalation response:

Type	Definition	Action
Soft blocker	Slowing progress; workaround exists	Note it; monitor; apply the workaround; no escalation needed
Hard blocker	Progress cannot continue without resolution	Escalate immediately; name who must resolve; set deadline
Stale blocker	Has been open >7 days without movement	Escalate to next level; flag in digest; the owner has failed to resolve

Project Nighthawk's facility status is a stale blocker ; it was first a soft blocker (waiting for a response, work could continue elsewhere), then a hard blocker (Q3 planning cannot proceed without the facility), and now a stale blocker (10 days without movement means the original escalation attempt failed). The appropriate response is formal escalation: a letter to the facility owner, with COO escalation if there is no response within five business days.

The stale blocker classification matters because it names the escalation failure. A hard blocker says "this is stuck." A stale blocker says "this has been stuck for too long: the handling so far has not worked, and a different approach is needed."

Configuring Your Dashboard​

Add the dashboard configuration to work.local.md. Here is the Panaversity configuration:

dashboard:
  sections:
    - p1_projects
    - p2_projects
    - key_metrics
    - open_actions
    - open_delegations
    - upcoming_decisions
    - calendar_highlights
  metrics_sources:
    hr: "Onboarding status; open positions; performance flags"
    finance: "Budget approvals pending; spend vs. plan"
    operations: "Compliance status; vendor renewals <90 days; change pipeline"
    sales: "Pipeline value; quota attainment"
  refresh: "Daily with digest; full weekly review on Monday"
  format: "One page; RAG status; action items explicit; 5-minute read"


Configure only the metrics_sources domains where you have deployed domain agents. If you have not deployed the HR domain agent (Chapter 37, planned), do not add hr: to the metrics sources: the dashboard will show an empty section, which is worse than no section.

The dashboard is designed to grow as you deploy more domain agents. Start with the domains you have and expand the metrics_sources configuration as new agents come online.

Exercise: Build Your Executive Dashboard​

Type: Configuration + Generation + The 5-Minute Test Time: 40 minutes Plugin command: /agentic-office:progress-tracker Goal: Configure, generate, and validate your executive dashboard

Step 1: Configure (10 minutes)​

Fill in the dashboard section of work.local.md:

sections:, which of the seven sections to include
metrics_sources:, only domains where you have deployed agents
refresh:: when you want the dashboard generated
format:; your quality standard
Step 2: Generate Weekly Status (5 minutes)​

Run the weekly status first:

/agentic-office:progress-tracker
> type: weekly-status


Review the RAG status for each project. Apply the three rules explicitly for any project where you are uncertain: is there a missed milestone? A hard blocker? An overdue decision? Correct the status if needed.

Step 3: Generate Executive Dashboard (5 minutes)​

Run the full dashboard:

/agentic-office:progress-tracker


Read it straight through. Do not evaluate yet, just read.

Step 4: The 5-Minute Test (20 minutes)​

Show the dashboard to a colleague (or evaluate as if you were the colleague) and ask: "From this dashboard, can you tell me what my week looks like without asking a follow-up question?"

If yes: note what is working and why. If no: identify what is missing and where it would come from in work.local.md.

Every gap in the 5-minute test is a work.local.md addition or a section configuration change. Make one change, regenerate, and repeat.

Deliverable: A configured work.local.md dashboard section, a generated executive dashboard with defensible RAG status for each project, and a 5-minute test result with at least one specific gap identified and addressed.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Use these prompts in Cowork or your preferred AI assistant.

Reproduce: Generate Zia's executive dashboard using the case study data.

Generate an executive dashboard for the week of 17 March 2026 for Zia Khan,
CEO of Panaversity. Use this data:

Projects:
- AgentFactory (P1): Chapter 28 narrative draft due Thursday; Chapter 28
  skills library also due Thursday as a separate deliverable. Both are
  in progress. Risk: two deliverables on the same deadline.
- Project Nighthawk (P2): Karachi expansion. Facility agreement stalled
  10+ days. No response to previous follow-ups. Q3 launch at risk if
  not resolved by 31 March. Formal letter being drafted (Zia, due Wed).
  This is a STALE BLOCKER (10+ days without movement).
- BankersAI (P2): Workshop #7 coming. Content review window opens 29 March.
  No immediate actions needed.

Domain agent metrics:
- HR: Ayesha Raza, Day 4 onboarding. Dr. Sana Mirza joins Monday 23 March.
- Finance: Analytics budget approved in principle; Omar's ROI brief due Monday.
- Operations: BSI ISO 27001 renewal, delegated to compliance; no update.
              ERP migration in progress.

Open actions this week:
- Zia: Nighthawk formal letter (Wed 19 March)
- Zia: Chapter 28 narrative (Thu 20 March)
- Zia: Chapter 28 skills library (Thu 20 March)

Open delegations:
- Omar Farooq: analytics ROI brief, Mon 24 March, confirmed
- Compliance: BSI ISO renewal. This week; no update

Apply the RAG status rules:
- RED: milestone missed or at imminent risk; hard blocker; decision overdue
- AMBER: milestone at risk; minor blocker; decision needed this week
- GREEN: all milestones on schedule; no blockers; no overdue decisions

Never show GREEN for a project where a milestone has slipped without
explicit acknowledgement.


What you are learning: Generating the dashboard manually makes the RAG rules concrete. You cannot apply a rule you have not tested. Before the next lesson, you should be able to state, without looking: why Project Nighthawk is RED, why AgentFactory is AMBER, and why BankersAI is GREEN.

Adapt: Generate your own executive dashboard.

Generate an executive dashboard for my current work. Here is my data:

Projects:
[List your P1 and P2 projects with current status, this week's activity,
and any blockers. For each project, state: is there a missed milestone?
A hard blocker? A decision overdue? This will determine the RAG status.]

Domain agent metrics:
[List any relevant status from domains you are tracking:
HR, Finance, Operations, Sales, etc. Only include domains you have data for.]

Open actions this week:
[List actions due this week or overdue]

Open delegations:
[Who you are waiting on, for what, by when]

Apply the RAG rules to each project and generate the full executive dashboard.
Include the headline status based on the worst-case RAG across all projects.

After generating the dashboard, run the 5-minute test: "Could someone tell from
this dashboard what my week looks like without asking a follow-up question?"
If not, identify what context is missing.


What you are learning: The 5-minute test reveals the gap between what you know about your week (full context in your head) and what the dashboard captures (only what is in work.local.md and your explicit input). Closing that gap is the ongoing work of maintaining good workplace memory.

Apply: Imagine your manager sends this message on Monday morning: "What's the overall status this week? Can you send me a brief?" Run the executive dashboard and weekly status.

My manager has asked for a weekly status brief. Generate both:
(1) A weekly project status (RAG per project; critical path; blockers)
(2) An executive dashboard (full seven-section view)

Use the following data for my work this week:
[Paste your current project, delegation, and action data]

After generating both, evaluate: could you forward either of these directly
to your manager, or would they need editing? What does the answer tell you
about your work.local.md configuration quality?


What you are learning: The test of a good executive dashboard is whether it is directly forwardable. If you would need to edit it before sending, the gap between the generated output and what you would write is the measure of what is missing from your work.local.md. This is useful data , not a criticism of the tool.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 11: Cross-Domain Intelligence →
