Cross-Domain Intelligence

The domain agents built in Chapters 28-38 operate in their own contexts. The finance agent from Chapter 28 knows about the analytics budget proposal. HR domain agents (Chapter 37, planned) know that Ayesha is in her onboarding window and that Dr. Sana Mirza joins Monday. The operations intelligence layer (Chapter 38, planned) knows the BSI ISO renewal is pending and the ERP migration is in progress. The Chapter 34 revenue engine knows the pipeline state.

None of these agents knows what the others know. They are isolated silos of intelligence: each excellent within its domain, each blind to the boundaries.

This lesson introduces the two commands that wire them together. /agentic-office:context-loader loads specific context from one or more domains before a task. So the task output is informed by everything relevant, not just what happens to be in the current conversation. /agentic-office:workplace-search searches all four memory layers simultaneously. So any question about your organisation returns results from every layer at once, not just the one layer you happened to open.

Together, these two commands are the integration layer that turns isolated domain agents into a coordinated organisation.

The Context Injection Pattern​

The core pattern is: before working on any task that touches more than one domain, load the relevant context first.

Without context injection, the pattern is: start working → realise you are missing relevant information → stop → find the information → restart. This context-switching cost is high, and the information found retrospectively is often incomplete.

With context injection, the pattern is: load context → start working with full picture → complete the task without context gaps.

The /agentic-office:context-loader command supports five context types:

Type	When to Use	Example
Single-domain	Task primarily affects one domain, but you want all relevant context	Load finance context before reviewing the analytics budget
Cross-domain	Task genuinely spans multiple domains simultaneously	Load HR + Finance + Ops for Dr. Sana Mirza's onboarding
Person	About to interact with someone; want their full context	Load full context on Omar before the budget ROI review
Project	About to work on a project; want all cross-domain implications	Load full context on Project Nighthawk
Decision	About to make a decision; want all relevant context loaded	Load context for the Islamabad expansion decision
Sample Cross-Domain Context Brief: Analytics Budget Discussion​

Here is the cross-domain context brief for a finance discussion involving HR and Operations implications.

/agentic-office:context-loader
> type: cross-domain
> I am about to discuss the analytics budget ROI brief with Omar.
> Load all relevant context: the proposal, approval status, Omar's
> communication style, and anything from operations or compliance
> that might affect the budget discussion.

CONTEXT BRIEF, Finance: Analytics Budget Discussion
Loaded from: work.local.md (people, projects, org memory) +
             Finance domain (Ch. 28) + Operations domain (Ch. 38)
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
CORE CONTEXT:
  This is a budget approval conversation , not a negotiation.
  The decision (D-2026-002) is already "approved in principle."
  The purpose of this conversation is to review Omar's ROI brief
  and confirm final sign-off, not to re-open the approval decision.

FINANCE CONTEXT:
  Proposal:   Analytics tooling + Ayesha onboarding costs
  Status:     Approved in principle (Executive Weekly, 17 March)
              Pending: Omar's ROI brief (due Monday 24 March)
  Watch:      The ROI brief will likely focus on reporting time savings.
              The stronger case (for any future CFO review) is revenue
              enablement, faster investor reporting = faster fundraising
              decisions. Frame the final sign-off around this framing,
              not cost reduction.

PEOPLE CONTEXT, OMAR FAROOQ:
  Communication style: Data-driven; structured presentation; needs lead time
  What he is likely to bring: A structured ROI case with numbers
  What to watch for: He will push back if scope creep is implied in
                     the review questions. Ask about ERP compatibility
                     as a clarifying question, not as a gating concern.
  What he needs from this conversation: Confirmation of approval so he
                                        can move to implementation

OPERATIONS CONTEXT:
  ERP migration: Finance system changes are in progress in Q2.
                 Confirm analytics tooling is compatible with the
                 post-migration data architecture before approving
                 any integration tooling.
  Implication:  Add one question to the ROI brief review: "Has ERP
                compatibility been confirmed for the chosen tooling?"
                This is not a blocker; it is a clarifying condition.

HR CONTEXT:
  Ayesha Raza: Day 4 of onboarding; pipeline audit is one of her
               first projects. The analytics budget approval directly
               affects her tooling access. Confirm that system access
               provisioning is included in the implementation plan,
               or there will be a delay between approval and Ayesha
               being able to use the tools.

WHAT TO WATCH FOR IN THE DISCUSSION:
  1. Does the ROI brief address both time savings and revenue enablement?
     (Time savings is easier to quantify; revenue enablement is more
     persuasive to finance stakeholders)
  2. Is ERP compatibility addressed? If not, raise it as a condition.
  3. Is Ayesha's tooling access included in the implementation timeline?

GAPS IN CONTEXT:
  → The specific tooling Omar is proposing is not in work.local.md.
    Review the ROI brief for the tool names before the conversation.
  → ERP migration completion date is not confirmed. Check with
    Operations before approving any Q2 tooling integrations.
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Reading the Context Brief​

Three structural elements are worth noting:

The domains are separated but synthesised. Finance context, Operations context, and HR context each appear in their own section , but the "What to Watch For" section synthesises them. The synthesis is what makes the brief useful: not just "here is what Finance knows" and "here is what HR knows," but "here is what matters when you put them together."

The gaps section is not a failure. The specific tooling name is not in work.local.md. So the brief tells you to check the ROI brief before the conversation. The ERP migration completion date is uncertain. So the brief tells you to confirm with Operations before approving integrations. Knowing what you do not know before a conversation is as valuable as knowing what you do know.

The core context is a reframe. The brief does not just summarise ; it reframes. "This is a budget approval conversation , not a negotiation. The decision is already 'approved in principle.'" This context prevents the most common failure mode: treating a confirmation conversation as a re-opening of the decision.

Cross-Context Search: All Four Layers at Once​

Where context injection loads context for a task you know you are about to do, cross-context search retrieves information about a topic you want to understand.

/agentic-office:workplace-search
> What do we know about the Islamabad expansion? Search everything.

SEARCH RESULTS: "Islamabad expansion"
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
Found in:

PROJECT MEMORY:
  BankersAI, Islamabad identified as potential third workshop location
  (after Karachi and Faisalabad); no project record created; classified
  as under consideration since Q4 2025

MEETING NOTES / DECISION LOG:
  Executive Weekly, 17 March 2026:
  D-2026-003: Islamabad expansion DEFERRED
  Reason: Project Nighthawk facility still unresolved; capacity risk
          of adding third location while Karachi is not yet secured
  Trigger for revisit: Project Nighthawk facility agreement signed

PEOPLE MEMORY:
  Zia Khan: Chairs the PIAIC Faisalabad SIG (monthly AI Special Interest
            Group for business leaders). The Faisalabad SIG model is the
            template for a potential Islamabad SIG if expansion proceeds.

TERMINOLOGY:
  PIAIC Faisalabad SIG: AI Special Interest Group for business leaders
                        in Faisalabad; Zia chairs monthly.
  Project Nighthawk: Internal codename for the Karachi expansion.
                     Do not use externally.

TASK / DELEGATION LOG:
  No active tasks related to Islamabad expansion.
  (Note: this means no one has been assigned to take any action
   on Islamabad since the deferral decision. This is correct,
   as D-2026-003 set no timeline)

RECOMMENDED NEXT STEP:
  Create a project stub for Islamabad if you want to start tracking it
  formally ahead of the Nighthawk trigger. Currently it is a deferred
  decision; nothing will happen until Project Nighthawk is resolved.
  If Nighthawk resolves before Q2 end, this decision becomes active
  immediately and a project record will be needed.
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

What the Search Reveals​

The Islamabad search returns context from five different layers, project memory, meeting decisions, people context, organisational terminology, and task history. Each result comes from a different part of work.local.md. Without the search command, accessing this picture would require navigating to each section manually.

The "No active tasks" entry in the task/delegation log is as informative as a positive result. It confirms that the deferral decision (D-2026-003) has been correctly followed; no one has been assigned to Islamabad work, which is exactly right given the deferral status.

The recommended next step turns search into action. Information without a suggested action is harder to use. The recommendation, create a project stub if you want to track it before the trigger: is specific and immediately actionable.

The Dr. Sana Mirza Onboarding Scenario​

Here is a realistic cross-domain scenario. Dr. Sana Mirza is joining Panaversity on Monday 23 March as Head of Curriculum. Her onboarding is not a single-domain task ; it genuinely touches HR (onboarding protocol), Finance (headcount budget), and Operations (system access).

/agentic-office:context-loader
> type: cross-domain
> I need to prepare for Dr. Sana Mirza's onboarding on Monday 23 March.
> She is joining as Head of Curriculum. Load context from HR, Finance,
> and Operations; everything relevant to preparing for her first week.

CONTEXT BRIEF, Dr. Sana Mirza Onboarding
Loaded from: work.local.md (people, projects) + HR domain (Ch. 37) +
             Finance domain (Ch. 28) + Operations domain (Ch. 38)
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
CORE CONTEXT:
  Dr. Sana Mirza joins Monday as Head of Curriculum: a NEW ROLE at
  Panaversity. She brings a PhD in Learning Sciences (Aga Khan University)
  and owns the PHM framework. She is academically precise and evidence-based.
  Her relationship with Omar Farooq needs careful mediation; they will work
  closely on the curriculum-analytics interface, and their professional styles
  are different.

HR CONTEXT:
  Onboarding protocol: 30-day structured onboarding; 30-day check-in
                       meeting (due 22 April); first week: org orientation,
                       access provisioning, intro to team rhythm
  Ayesha Raza connection: Ayesha is in her own onboarding window (Day 4
                           as of 17 March). Two people onboarding simultaneously
                          , coordinate check-in schedules to avoid overlap.
  PHM framework: She owns this IP. Ensure her first week includes time to
                 brief the team on PHM. This is a strategic asset that others
                 need to understand.

FINANCE CONTEXT:
  Headcount: Dr. Sana Mirza was approved as a headcount addition in the
             Q4 2025 Compass review. Budget confirmed.
  Analytics interaction: Her curriculum role has an analytics interface
                         (what data does the curriculum team use to measure
                         learning outcomes?). Coordinate with Omar on the
                         analytics budget, her tooling needs may be part
                         of the same approval currently in flight.

OPERATIONS CONTEXT:
  System access: New hires require access provisioning for: Notion workspace,
                 Slack channels (curriculum team + leadership), GitHub
                 (for content repositories), and the SSO system.
                 Standard lead time: 2 business days from request.
                 ACTION: Submit access request today (Thursday) to ensure
                         access is ready for Monday.
  ERP note: ERP migration in progress; confirm no curriculum team
            systems are affected by the migration timeline.

PEOPLE CONTEXT:
  Dr. Sana Mirza communication style: Academic precision; evidence-based;
  prefers written briefs over verbal updates. Allow time for thoughtful
  responses; she does not respond quickly to exploratory questions.
  Omar dynamic: Proactively introduce them before Monday if possible.
                Their working relationship is important to the PHM-analytics
                interface. An unmediated first meeting in a group setting
                risks a difficult start.

WHAT TO WATCH FOR:
  1. System access, submit today; confirm ready by Monday morning
  2. Omar introduction, brief introduction before Monday recommended
  3. Ayesha overlap, coordinate 30-day check-in schedules to avoid
     both happening the same week
  4. PHM briefing, schedule a team session in week 2 or 3

GAPS IN CONTEXT:
  → Dr. Sana Mirza's preferred working hours and location are not in
    work.local.md. Confirm with her by email before Monday.
  → Analytics tooling needs (for the curriculum-analytics interface)
    have not been discussed with Omar yet. This should happen in
    the first two weeks.
  → Specific Notion workspace structure for the curriculum team has
    not been set up. Operations needs a request to create this.
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

Integrated Action Plan​

From the context brief, the integrated action plan for Dr. Sana Mirza's onboarding is:

Action	Domain	Owner	Due
Submit system access provisioning request	Operations	Zia	Thursday 20 March
Brief introduction to Omar (before Monday)	People	Zia	Friday 21 March
Prepare written welcome brief for Dr. Sana Mirza	HR/People	Zia	Friday 21 March
Coordinate 30-day check-in scheduling with Ayesha's	HR	Zia	Week 1
Schedule PHM framework team briefing	Curriculum	Dr. Sana Mirza	Week 2-3
Discuss analytics tooling needs with Omar	Finance/Analytics	Zia	Week 2

Without cross-domain context loading, three of these actions: the ERP check, the Omar introduction mediation note, and the analytics tooling needs, would not appear in any single-domain task list. They exist in the gaps between domains.

Integration Protocols​

Individual context loads are useful. Integration protocols automate them.

An integration protocol is a rule in work.local.md that says: "When event X happens in domain Y, automatically check domains A, B, and C for relevant context."

Here is a partial integration protocol configuration for Panaversity:

integration_protocols:
  new_hire:
    triggers:
      - "new hire approved"
      - "headcount confirmed"
      - "joining date set"
    check_domains:
      - finance: "Is headcount within approved budget? Any tooling budget needed?"
      - operations: "System access timeline? Any affected systems?"
      - hr: "Onboarding protocol? Any concurrent onboardings?"
    surface_context: true

  vendor_renewal:
    triggers:
      - "contract renewal due"
      - "vendor review"
      - "licence expiring"
    check_domains:
      - finance: "Budget approved for renewal? Any budget cycle considerations?"
      - operations: "Compliance dependencies? Any service changes?"
      - legal: "Contract review needed? Any compliance obligations?"
    surface_context: true

  project_escalation:
    triggers:
      - "hard blocker identified"
      - "stale blocker (>7 days)"
      - "milestone slipped"
    check_domains:
      - finance: "Any financial impact of delay?"
      - hr: "Any people availability implications?"
      - operations: "Any downstream operational dependencies?"
    surface_context: true


The new_hire protocol is what would have automatically surfaced the Operations system access requirement for Dr. Sana Mirza; if it had been configured before her onboarding. The first time you run cross-domain context loading manually for a new hire scenario, you identify what the protocol should contain. Then you configure it. The next new hire gets the full context automatically.

This is the direction of sophistication: from manual cross-domain context loading (this lesson) to automated integration protocols (ongoing configuration) to a system that proactively surfaces cross-domain context before you need to ask for it (the emerging behaviour of a well-configured agentic organisation).

Exercise: The Cross-Domain Integration Sprint​

Type: Applied Practice, Cross-Domain Scenario Time: 45 minutes Plugin commands: /agentic-office:context-loader + /agentic-office:workplace-search Goal: Load cross-domain context for a real scenario, run three searches, practice the onboarding scenario, and identify integration gaps

Step 1: Cross-Domain Context Load (15 minutes)​

Choose a real scenario from your work this week that touches at least two domains (a conversation, a decision, a project handoff, a new hire, a vendor discussion). Load cross-domain context:

/agentic-office:context-loader
> type: cross-domain
> I am about to [describe your scenario].
> Load all relevant context from [list the relevant domains].


Annotate the output:

Which items were already in your head before reading?
Which items did the brief surface that you had not considered?
What is in the "gaps in context" section? Are these genuine gaps that would affect the outcome?
Step 2: Cross-Context Searches (10 minutes)​

Run three searches: one for a project, one for a person, one for a decision:

/agentic-office:workplace-search
> [Your project name], search everything

/agentic-office:workplace-search
> [Person's name]: what do we know about their current focus?

/agentic-office:workplace-search
> When did we last decide anything about [topic]?


For each search, note: which layer produced the most useful result? What was not found (and should be added to work.local.md)?

Step 3: The Onboarding Scenario (15 minutes)​

Use the Dr. Sana Mirza scenario as a reference model. Apply it to someone joining your team (or a recent joiner). Load cross-domain context:

/agentic-office:context-loader
> type: cross-domain
> I need to prepare for [Name]'s onboarding on [date].
> They are joining as [role]. Load context from HR, Finance, and Operations.


Generate the integrated action plan from the context brief. Which actions would you have missed without the cross-domain load?

Step 4: Integration Gap Analysis (5 minutes)​

Ask the integrating question:

/agentic-office:workplace-search
> What is at risk across all my projects and domains right now?


Then ask: "What would I need to add to work.local.md to make this answer comprehensive?" The gap between the current answer and the ideal answer is your integration roadmap.

Deliverable: A cross-domain context brief for a real scenario with annotations (known/surfaced/gaps), three search results with layer analysis, an integrated onboarding action plan, and a gap analysis identifying the top 3 additions to work.local.md.

Try With AI​
TRY WITH AI

Use these prompts in Cowork or your preferred AI assistant.

Reproduce: Load cross-domain context for the analytics budget discussion.

I am about to discuss the analytics budget ROI brief with Omar Farooq,
Head of Analytics at Panaversity.

Load cross-domain context from:

Finance: Omar's analytics proposal, tooling + Ayesha onboarding costs.
Approved in principle (Executive Weekly 17 March). ROI brief due Monday.

People/HR: Omar, data-driven, structured, does not like surprises,
           needs lead time. Will push back on scope creep.
           Ayesha Raza, in her onboarding window (Day 4); pipeline
           audit is her first project; analytics budget affects her tooling.

Operations: ERP migration in progress in Q2. Analytics tooling must be
            compatible with post-migration architecture.

Generate a cross-domain context brief with these sections:
- Core context (reframe the purpose of the conversation)
- Finance context
- People context (Omar's communication approach)
- Operations context (what to check)
- HR context (Ayesha's tooling needs)
- What to watch for in the discussion
- Gaps in context (what is not known that would be useful)


What you are learning: The core context section of the brief should reframe the purpose of the conversation before you walk in. "This is a budget confirmation, not a re-opening of the approval" is more useful than a summary of the budget figures. Generating this reframe forces you to be clear about what you actually need from the conversation, which is the most important preparation you can do.

Adapt: Load cross-domain context for your own scenario.

I am about to [describe a real task or conversation you have this week
that involves more than one domain: a hire, a budget decision, a
vendor discussion, a project escalation].

The relevant domains are: [list 2-3 domains from Finance, HR, Operations,
Sales, Legal, or other functions relevant to your work]

For each domain, I know this relevant context:
[Domain 1]: [What you know about this domain's stake in the task]
[Domain 2]: [What you know about this domain's stake in the task]

Generate a cross-domain context brief. Include:
- Core context (reframe: what is the actual purpose of this task?)
- [Domain 1] context
- [Domain 2] context
- People context (anyone involved and how they communicate)
- What to watch for
- Gaps in context (what is not known that would change the approach?)

After the brief, tell me: what would I need to add to my workplace memory
to generate this brief automatically next time?


What you are learning: The "what would I need to add" question at the end converts the context load into a memory improvement task. Every manual context load reveals gaps in your work.local.md. Addressing those gaps means the next similar task starts with more context and fewer gaps. The system gets smarter each time you use it.

Apply: Run the integration search and identify your knowledge gaps.

I want to understand what is at risk across all my work right now,
across every domain and every project.

Using the following context from my work.local.md:
[Paste your projects section, open delegations, key decisions from this week]

Answer these questions:
1. What is at risk in the next 7 days, across all projects and domains?
   Group risks by: (a) hard blockers needing immediate action,
   (b) soft blockers with workarounds, (c) stale items needing escalation)
2. What cross-domain dependencies am I not tracking? (e.g. a Finance
   decision that affects HR, an Operations item that affects Sales)
3. What would I need to add to my workplace memory to make this risk
   assessment automatic? (List specific additions to work.local.md)

The third question is the most important. The gap between the current
answer and a comprehensive answer is your integration roadmap.


What you are learning: The question "what would I need to add to make this comprehensive?" is the most important habit this lesson teaches. Running it regularly converts the integration sprint from a one-time exercise into an ongoing improvement loop. The agentic organisation gets more intelligent as the memory gets richer , and the memory gets richer because you notice and address gaps.

Flashcards Study Aid​

Continue to Lesson 12: The Digital Chief of Staff →
