The Complete Teaching and Learning System

James flips through a programming chapter later in the book. He notices something: every chapter seems to follow the same rhythm. It starts with a complete program to study, moves through tracing and investigation, gives him something to modify, and ends with something to build from scratch.

"Is that on purpose?" he asks Emma.

"Every chapter, every lesson, every exercise," she says. "Once you see the pattern, you'll never feel lost. You'll always know where you are in the process and what comes next."

You now know the five stages of PRIMM-AI+ -- Predict, Run, Investigate, Modify, Make -- and the structural safeguards that keep you honest: AI-free checkpoints, mastery gates, confidence scoring, and the verification ladder. But knowing the stages is one thing. The question is: how do these pieces work together in practice?

This lesson answers that question. It shows how four teaching methods -- worked examples, Parsons problems, live coding, and peer instruction -- are woven into the PRIMM-AI+ stages. It explains the difference between learning in a classroom and learning on your own. And it reveals the practical lesson architecture that every chapter in Parts 4 and 5 follows, so you will recognize the pattern the moment you encounter it.

The Four Teaching Methods Inside PRIMM-AI+​

PRIMM-AI+ provides the sequence and the safeguards. These four methods are the specific techniques used inside the sequence.

Worked Examples: Predict and Investigate​

James opens a new chapter and sees a complete Python program at the top. He did not write it. His AI assistant did not write it. It is just there, ready to study.

"Why don't I write it myself?" he asks. "Wouldn't I learn more by struggling through it from scratch?"

"Try it," Emma says. "Write a program that formats a temperature reading with a city name and a unit label."

James stares at the blank screen. He needs a city variable, a temperature variable, a unit... how does he format them? What order? Does he need str()? Where do the spaces go? He is juggling six decisions at once and making progress on none of them.

Emma shows him the worked example: four clean lines that do exactly what he was struggling to start. He reads them and immediately understands the structure, the same structure he could not invent from nothing.

"I see," James says. "Starting from a blank screen, I was solving what to write and how to write it at the same time. The example takes care of the first problem so I can focus on the second."

Every code block in this book is a worked example -- a complete, functioning program you study before writing your own. Instead of starting with a blank screen, you inspect a finished program, predict its output, run it, and analyze its structure. Worked examples are easier on your brain because you do not have to invent everything at once. You focus on understanding how the code works, not on producing it.

Where it fits: Predict (you study the example and commit to a prediction) and Investigate (you trace through it and produce artifacts like trace tables).

Parsons Problems: Between Investigate and Modify​

Emma shows James four lines of code, but they are in the wrong order. "Put these back in the right sequence."

James stares at them. He knows what each line does; he traced through a similar program minutes ago. But arranging them correctly requires something deeper: understanding why the order matters.

A Parsons problem gives you the correct lines of code in scrambled order. Your job is to rearrange them into a working program. This tests whether you truly understand the program's structure -- the order of operations, the indentation, the data flow -- without requiring you to write code from scratch.

Where it fits: Between Investigate and Modify. After you have traced through a worked example and understand how it works, a Parsons problem checks that understanding before you attempt free modifications. Consider this example:

# These four lines are scrambled. What is the correct order?
print(label)
temp: int = 32
label: str = city + ": " + str(temp) + "C"
city: str = "London"


Output (when correctly ordered):

London: 32C

Hint
Answer

In solo mode, your AI assistant can generate fresh Parsons problems from any program you have just studied. Ask it to scramble the lines and quiz you.

Live Coding: Investigate and Modify​

Emma opens a code editor and starts typing, narrating as she goes: "First I'll create the variable... now I need to convert the number to text... watch what happens when I forget str()... see that error? That's the kind of mistake you learn from."

James watches her think out loud, including the wrong turns and corrections. "That's more useful than seeing the finished code," he realizes.

In classroom settings, the instructor writes or edits code in real time, narrating their thinking aloud -- including mistakes, debugging steps, and design choices. The value is seeing how an expert thinks, not just admiring their finished code.

Where it fits: Investigate (the instructor traces and explains) and Modify (the instructor demonstrates changes). In solo mode, your AI assistant can serve a similar role when you ask it to walk through adding a feature step by step, explaining its reasoning as it goes.

Peer Instruction: Across All Stages​

James writes his prediction: London: 32C. Emma writes hers: London: 32 C, with an extra space before the C. They disagree. Before either of them runs the code, they debate: does str(temp) + "C" produce a space or not? The disagreement forces both of them to look more closely at the code.

Peer instruction means thinking individually first, then discussing your answer with a partner or small group. It is especially powerful in Predict -- you write your prediction, compare it with a classmate, discuss any disagreements, and only then run the code.

Where it fits: All stages. In classroom mode, it happens naturally through pair and group work. In solo mode, your AI assistant becomes your "peer" -- but only after you have committed your own answer first. The AI-free checkpoint ensures this.

At a Glance​
Method	What It Is	Where It Fits in PRIMM-AI+
Worked Examples	Complete programs you study before writing	Predict and Investigate
Parsons Problems	Scrambled code lines you reorder	Between Investigate and Modify
Live Coding	Real-time coding with narrated thinking	Investigate and Modify
Peer Instruction	Individual thinking, then group discussion	Across all stages
Classroom Mode vs. Solo Mode​

"I'm studying alone," James says. "No teacher, no classmates. Isn't PRIMM designed for classrooms? I'll miss the peer instruction, the group discussions. That was half the method."

He has a point. PRIMM was tested in classrooms with human teachers guiding the process. But James thinks about what he has learned over the last three lessons: the AI-free checkpoints that force honest self-assessment, the confidence scoring that makes self-deception visible, the mastery gates that prevent skipping ahead, the mandatory trace artifacts that prove understanding.

"Actually," he says, "the checkpoints and gates do what a teacher would do: they catch me skipping steps. The confidence scoring does what a classmate would do: it challenges my assumptions. I'm not missing the structure. I'm replacing the people who enforce it with systems that enforce it."

"That's exactly why we built the solo mode safeguards," Emma says.

Classroom mode. The teacher orchestrates the process. Predictions are shared in pairs or small groups before anyone runs the code. Investigation questions are discussed as a class before consulting AI. Modification approaches are compared across teams. The teacher controls AI permissions and uses mastery gates as checkpoints for the whole class.

Solo mode. You replace human collaboration with structured AI interaction -- but only after passing through the AI-free checkpoint at each stage. You write your prediction alone, commit your confidence score, and only then engage your AI assistant. The confidence scoring system is especially important in solo mode because it makes self-deception visible. There is no classmate to challenge your assumptions, so you must challenge them yourself.

This book is designed for solo mode. Every technique works with just you, the book, and your AI assistant. If you are in a classroom, your teacher will add the collaborative elements -- pair predictions, group investigations, live coding demonstrations -- on top of the same structure.

A Practical Lesson Architecture​

James has a question that every student asks: "What exactly happens when I open a lesson? What do I do first? What comes after that?"

Emma walks him through it. "Every lesson follows the same five steps, one for each PRIMM stage. Once you've done it twice, you'll stop thinking about the process and just focus on the code."

Here is what a typical lesson looks like when all the pieces work together. You will recognize this pattern starting in Chapter 45.

Step 1: Predict. The lesson presents a compact, complete program (a worked example). You write your prediction and confidence score without AI assistance. This is the worked example method combined with the AI-free checkpoint from Lesson 2.

Step 2: Run. You run the code and compare the output to your prediction. In classroom mode, you share predictions with a partner first (peer instruction). In solo mode, you commit your prediction to writing before executing. The prediction-reality gap drives learning regardless of mode.

Step 3: Investigate. You produce a trace table or line-by-line explanation. You discuss targeted questions -- with peers in classroom mode, or with your AI assistant in solo mode after your own first explanation. Some lessons include a Parsons problem here -- scrambled lines you reorder to confirm you understand the program's structure before moving on.

Step 4: Modify. You perform a modification task, changing the existing program to add a feature or alter its behavior. In classroom mode, the teacher may follow with a live-coding demonstration of a more advanced change. You write the modification yourself; AI evaluates it afterward.

Step 5: Make. You write a specification first (AI-free), attempt the solution yourself, and use AI only for review, debugging, or targeted syntax help after your first attempt exists. This is Spec-Driven Development from Chapter 16 applied to your own programs.

Notice the progression: you understand before you change, and you change before you create. Every step earns you the right to attempt the next one.

Where do Parsons Problems fit? Parsons problems -- scrambled lines you reorder into a working program -- are a bridge between Investigate and Modify. They appear inside Step 3 (Investigate) when a lesson needs to test structural understanding before you attempt free modifications. Not every lesson includes one, but when you see scrambled code, that is a Parsons problem checking whether you understand why the code is ordered the way it is.

How Every Chapter Follows PRIMM-AI+​

"So every lesson follows those five steps," James says. "But what about the chapter as a whole? Is there a pattern there too?"

"Same structure, bigger scale," Emma says. "A chapter opens with worked examples, moves through investigation lessons, bridges to modification exercises, and finishes with a capstone where you build something new. You'll never open a chapter wondering what to expect."

The five-step sequence above is not just a lesson pattern -- it is the chapter pattern. Every chapter in Parts 4 and 5 maps to the same structure at a larger scale.

Chapter Element	PRIMM-AI+ Connection	What Happens
Chapter Opening	Worked Example + Predict and Run	You see complete programs, predict their output with confidence scoring, then run them
Core Lessons	Investigate with Artifacts	You trace variables, test edge cases, and produce visible artifacts
Structural Bridge	Parsons Problems	Scrambled-code exercises test your structural understanding
Exercises	Modify	You change existing programs to add features or fix issues
Capstone	Make with Spec-Driven Development	You build something new from a specification, with AI as reviewer

You will never be dropped into a Make exercise cold. By the time a chapter asks you to write code from scratch, you will have predicted, run, investigated, and modified programs using the same concepts. The structure is your safety net.

IF YOU ARE NEW TO PROGRAMMING

The predictable structure is your biggest advantage. Every chapter follows the same rhythm: see code, predict, run, investigate, modify, make. You will never open a lesson wondering "what am I supposed to do?" The pattern becomes automatic after two chapters.

IF YOU HAVE CODED BEFORE

You already use these methods informally: studying examples, tweaking code, building from scratch. PRIMM-AI+ gives you a structured vocabulary for what you do by instinct and adds AI boundaries that prevent experienced developers from over-relying on AI just as easily as beginners.

Operational Takeaways​
Four teaching methods -- worked examples, Parsons problems, live coding, and peer instruction -- are embedded within PRIMM-AI+ stages, not added on top of them.
This book is designed for solo mode: you, the book, and your AI assistant. Classroom teachers add collaborative elements on top of the same structure.
Every lesson follows a five-step architecture that maps to the five PRIMM stages: predict (with worked example), run and compare, investigate (with artifacts and optional Parsons problems), modify, and make (with specification).
Every chapter follows the same pattern at a larger scale: opening worked examples, investigative lessons, structural bridges, modification exercises, and a make capstone.
The pattern is deliberate: you understand before you change, and you change before you create. No stage is skippable.
Try With AI​
Prompt 1: Generate a Parsons Problem​
I am learning about Parsons problems -- exercises where you rearrange
scrambled lines of code into the correct order. Here is a simple
Python program:

city: str = "London"
temp: int = 32
label: str = city + ": " + str(temp) + "C"
print(label)

Scramble these four lines and present them to me in random order.
Ask me to put them back in the correct sequence. After I answer,
tell me if I got it right and explain why the order matters.


What you are learning: Parsons problems test structural understanding -- whether you know not just what code does, but why it must be ordered the way it is. The scrambled lines force you to reason about data flow: which variables must exist before others can use them.

Prompt 2: AI as Peer Instruction Partner​
I want to practice peer instruction with you. Show me a short
Python program (4-6 lines, using only variables and print, no
loops) and ask me to predict its output. After I give my prediction
and confidence score, share YOUR prediction and reasoning as if
you were a study partner. Then we will run the code together and
compare notes.


What you are learning: Peer instruction in solo mode. By asking AI to share its own "prediction" and reasoning, you practice the compare-and-discuss step that makes peer instruction effective -- even when studying alone.

Prompt 3: Walk Through All Five Steps​

You have not learned Python syntax yet, and that is fine. This exercise uses the PRIMM method itself: you will predict what unfamiliar code does, then verify. The goal is practicing the method, not understanding every keyword.

I am learning about the five-step PRIMM-AI+ lesson architecture:
1. Predict (with worked example, AI-free)
2. Run and compare
3. Investigate (with artifacts)
4. Modify
5. Make (with specification)

Show me a short Python program (4-6 lines, using only variables
and print) and walk me through all five steps. At each step,
tell me which step we are on and what I should do. Start by
showing the code and asking me to predict.


What you are learning: How the five-step lesson architecture feels in practice. By experiencing all five steps with AI guiding the process, you will recognize the pattern immediately when you encounter it in Chapter 45 and beyond.

Looking Ahead​

James sits back. In four lessons, he has gone from "what is PRIMM?" to knowing exactly how every lesson and every chapter in this book will work. The five stages. The nine enhancements. The four teaching methods. The five-step lesson architecture.

"I feel like I have a map now," he says.

"You do," Emma says. "And here's the thing: once the pattern is automatic, you stop thinking about the process and start thinking about the code. That's when real learning accelerates. Starting with the next chapter, you'll actually walk the territory. The next chapter introduces the ten axioms that guide how professionals build software with AI: the principles that turn a student into a practitioner."

You now know how you will learn: the five stages, the structural safeguards, the four teaching methods, and the lesson architecture. The next chapter introduces the ten axioms that guide professional AI-driven development. You will experience those axioms through the PRIMM-AI+ lens: predicting what professional code should look like, investigating why each axiom matters, and eventually building programs that embody them.

And if the Python code in this chapter looked foreign, that is expected. When you reach your first Python lessons later in the book, you will start from the absolute basics using this exact map.
