Ruff -- Your Code Quality Guardian

In Lesson 3, James installed the discipline stack and configured every tool inside pyproject.toml. SmartNotes now has pytest, pyright, and ruff listed as dev dependencies, each with its own configuration section. But none of the tools have actually run yet. The configuration is in place. The verification has not started.

Emma gives James a small block of Python code. "Type this into main.py. Run it. Then run your linter. Tell me what you find." She walks away.

James types exactly what she gave him -- including a line that loads a library he never uses, a line that stores a value he never looks at again, and messy spacing that changes from line to line. He runs the file: uv run main.py. It prints the expected output. He leans back. "Works fine."

Then he remembers: run the linter. He types uv run ruff check .. The screen fills with warnings. Five lines, each pointing to a specific problem that Python's interpreter silently ignored. He stares at the output. "But... it ran."

His first reaction: an unused import is not a bug. The code produces the right output. The customer does not care whether he imported os and never used it. That is cosmetic.

But the fourth warning is different. F841: Local variable temp_result is assigned to but never used. He wrote that line to store a calculation. He thought he used it later in the code. He did not.

"That one is not cosmetic," James says quietly when Emma comes back. "I thought I was using that value. I was not. The result of that entire calculation is going nowhere."

"The unused imports were the price of admission," Emma says. "The real catch was line four."

The Problem Without a Linter​

James's code ran. Python did not complain. But the code had three problems that would cause real trouble on a team:

The unused library. One line loaded an external library that was never used anywhere in the file. In a small file, this is clutter. In a large project with hundreds of files, unused libraries slow things down, confuse readers about what the file actually needs, and create false leads when debugging.

The stored-but-forgotten value. One line saved a result that was never looked at again. This is almost always a bug. Either James forgot to use it (the work is wasted), or he made a typo and used a different name later (the result is lost). Python will never tell you. The code runs. The bug hides.

The inconsistent spacing. Some lines had spaces around the equals sign and others did not. Mixed spacing makes code harder to read, and on a team of five developers, each person's style creates conflicts over appearance -- not over logic.

These are not theoretical problems. They are the daily reality of every team that writes Python without automated quality checks. The solution is a linter: a tool that reads your code and reports problems that the language itself does not catch.

Ruff Defined​

Ruff is a Python linter and formatter written in Rust. It checks your code for bugs, style violations, and structural problems (linting), and it reformats your code to follow a consistent style (formatting). One tool replaces an entire ecosystem of older Python quality tools.

Before ruff existed, a Python project that wanted thorough quality checks needed to install and configure multiple tools:

Old Tool	What It Did	Ruff Replacement
Flake8	Linting (style + bugs)	ruff check
Black	Formatting (consistent style)	ruff format
isort	Import sorting	ruff check with I rules
pyupgrade	Modernize old syntax	ruff check with UP rules
autoflake	Remove unused imports	ruff check --fix with F rules
flake8-bugbear	Common bug patterns	ruff check with B rules

Six tools, six configurations, six installation steps, six places where versions could conflict. Ruff replaces all of them with a single binary. It runs 10 to 100 times faster than these tools because it is written in Rust, not Python. And it is made by Astral -- the same company that built uv.

Two concepts are central to understanding ruff, and they are different from each other:

Concept	What It Does	Analogy
Linting	Finds problems: bugs, unused code, style violations, import order	A building inspector checking for code violations
Formatting	Fixes style: spacing, indentation, quote style, line length	A copy editor making every page look consistent

Linting finds problems. Formatting enforces style. A linting error might be a real bug (a name that does not exist anywhere in the code). A formatting change is never a bug -- it is a style preference (single quotes vs double quotes). Both matter, but for different reasons.

Axiom IX in Action​

In Axiom IX from Chapter 43, you learned that verification is a pipeline -- not a manual checklist you remember to follow, but an automated sequence that runs every time you change code. Ruff is the first stage of that pipeline.

Consider what happens without ruff. James finishes writing code. He runs it. It works. He commits. He opens a pull request. Emma reads the code and notices an unused library on line 3. She leaves a comment. James fixes it and pushes again. Emma notices inconsistent spacing on line 17. Another comment. Another fix. Another push. Three rounds of review for problems that have nothing to do with logic or design.

With ruff, those problems never reach Emma. James runs uv run ruff check . before committing. The unused library is flagged. The inconsistent spacing is caught. James fixes both in seconds. The pull request arrives clean. Emma spends her time on what matters: design, correctness, and edge cases.

This is Axiom IX in action. The verification is automated. The pipeline catches mechanical problems so that humans can focus on judgment problems.

Practical Application​
Step 1: Create a File With Problems​

To see ruff in action, you need a file with problems for it to find. Open main.py in your SmartNotes project and replace its contents with the following code.

import os
import sys
from collections import OrderedDict

def add_note(title, content):
    temp_result = len(content)
    note = {"title": title, "content": content}
    return note

def search_notes(notes,query):
    results=[]
    for note in notes:
        if query.lower() in note["title"].lower():
            results.append(note)
    return results

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_notes = []
    my_notes.append(add_note("Meeting", "Discuss project timeline"))
    my_notes.append(add_note("Shopping", "Buy groceries"))
    found = search_notes(my_notes, "meeting")
    print(found)


You will learn the Python features in this code in later chapters. For now, type it exactly as shown and focus on what ruff reports.

This code runs without errors. Python will execute it and produce the correct output. But it has problems that ruff will catch.

Step 2: Run ruff check​

Run the linter from the SmartNotes project root:

uv run ruff check .


Output:

main.py:1:8: F401 [*] `os` imported but unused
main.py:2:8: F401 [*] `sys` imported but unused
main.py:3:25: F401 [*] `collections.OrderedDict` imported but unused
main.py:6:5: F841 Local variable `temp_result` is assigned to but never used
Found 4 errors.
[*] 3 fixable with the `--fix` option.

IF RUFF REPORTS "NO FILES FOUND"

Make sure you are in the smartnotes/ project directory, not the parent folder. Run ls (or dir on Windows) and confirm you see pyproject.toml and main.py.

Every line follows the same format: file:line:column: RULE_CODE message. Read the first line: main.py:1:8: F401 [*] 'os' imported but unused. This tells you:

Part	Meaning
main.py	The file with the problem
1:8	Line 1, column 8
F401	The rule code (Pyflakes rule 401: unused import)
[*]	This issue can be auto-fixed
`os` imported but unused	The human-readable explanation

The rule code is the key to understanding what ruff found. Each code starts with a letter prefix that tells you which category of rules caught the problem:

Prefix	Rule Category	What It Catches	Example Code
F	Pyflakes	Unused imports, undefined names, unused variables	F401, F841
E	pycodestyle (errors)	PEP 8 style violations: indentation, whitespace, line length	E501, E711
W	pycodestyle (warnings)	PEP 8 warnings: whitespace, deprecated features	W291, W605
I	isort	Import sorting order	I001
UP	pyupgrade	Old Python syntax that can be modernized	UP006, UP035
B	flake8-bugbear	Common programming mistakes and design problems	B006, B905
SIM	flake8-simplify	Code that can be written more simply	SIM102, SIM110

In the SmartNotes output, all four errors use F (Pyflakes) rules: three unused imports (F401) and one unused stored value (F841). The message says "Local variable temp_result" -- that is the Python term for a value you store inside a function. In earlier lessons, we called this a "stored value" or a "stored-but-forgotten value." "Local variable" is the technical name for the same thing.

You will learn the full definition in a later chapter. For now, the important point is that these are not style preferences. They are actual problems -- dead code that clutters the file and may indicate bugs.

Read and Predict: The output says [*] next to the F401 errors but not next to the F841 error (unused variable). What do you think [*] means for the auto-fix behavior? Why might ruff be willing to auto-fix an unused import but not an unused variable?

Check your predictions
AI IN PRACTICE

When you ask an AI assistant to write Python code, the result is not guaranteed to be clean. AI-generated code often includes extra imports, unused stored values, and inconsistent formatting -- exactly the problems ruff was built to catch. The AI is not wrong on purpose; it optimizes for working code, not clean code. That is why you never trust generated code by reading it. You run uv run ruff check . and let the tool verify what your eyes cannot. The faster code gets generated, the more you need automated verification.

Spot the Bug: James asks an AI assistant to write a utility function. The AI generates this code:

import json
import re

def clean_title(title):
    cleaned = re.sub(r'[^\w\s]', '', title)
    return cleaned.strip()


Before running any tool, read the code yourself. Look at the two imports at the top and the function body below. Which import is never used in the function body? What ruff rule code would flag it? (Hint: check the rule prefix table above.)

Check your answer
Step 3: Auto-fix With --fix​

Ruff can fix many issues automatically. Run:

uv run ruff check --fix .


Output:

Found 4 errors (3 fixed, 1 remaining).


Open main.py again. The three unused import lines are gone. Ruff removed the dead imports automatically.

The line temp_result = len(content) on line 6 is still there. Ruff flagged it but did not remove it because removing that line could change how the program behaves -- the code on the right side of the = might do something important in other situations. Ruff is conservative: it auto-fixes problems where the fix is safe (removing imports that are never used), and it flags problems where human judgment is needed (removing code that might be intentional).

Step 4: Run ruff format​

Linting found bugs. Now formatting fixes style. Run:

uv run ruff format .


Output:

1 file reformatted


Open main.py and compare the search_notes function before and after formatting:

Before ruff format:

def search_notes(notes,query):
    results=[]


After ruff format:

def search_notes(notes, query):
    results = []


Ruff added a space after the comma (notes,query became notes, query) and spaces around the = sign (results=[] became results = []). These changes do not affect how the code runs. They affect how the code reads. Consistent spacing makes code scannable -- your eyes can parse structure without stumbling over inconsistencies.

The formatting rules come from the [tool.ruff.format] section in your pyproject.toml:

[tool.ruff.format]
quote-style = "double"
indent-style = "space"


Ruff formats with double quotes and spaces (not tabs). The line length limit comes from [tool.ruff]:

[tool.ruff]
line-length = 88


Any line longer than 88 characters will be wrapped. The number 88 is a convention borrowed from Black, the Python formatter that ruff replaces.

Step 5: Verify Clean​

Run both commands again to confirm everything is resolved:

uv run ruff check .


Output:

Found 1 error.


The remaining error is the unused temp_result line. In real development, you would either use that stored value or remove the line entirely. For now, you know the difference: ruff check found the problems, ruff format fixed the style, and one issue remains that requires your judgment.

Run the formatter check to confirm formatting is consistent:

uv run ruff format --check .


Output:

1 file already formatted


The --check flag tells ruff to verify formatting without making changes. If any file needed reformatting, ruff would report it and exit with a non-zero exit code -- useful in a CI pipeline where you want the build to fail if someone forgot to format their code.

CHECKPOINT: VERIFY YOUR PROGRESS

Run these two commands in the SmartNotes directory:

uv run ruff check .        # should show 1 error (the unused temp_result)
uv run ruff format --check . # should show "1 file already formatted"


If you see these results, ruff is configured and working. Your main.py is formatted correctly with one known lint issue remaining (F841) that requires your judgment.

Anti-Patterns​

Emma showed James these patterns after his first ruff session. Each one undermines the value of having a linter:

Anti-Pattern	What Happens	Why It Fails	The Fix
Ignoring lint warnings	James sees warnings, decides "it still runs," and commits anyway	Warnings accumulate; 3 become 30 become 300; nobody reads them anymore	Fix every warning before committing; use --fix for auto-fixable issues
Formatting by hand	James adjusts spacing and quotes manually to match team style	Slow, inconsistent, and triggers style debates in code review	Run uv run ruff format . once; the tool is faster and more consistent than any human
# noqa everywhere	James suppresses warnings by adding # noqa: F401 to every flagged line	The warnings exist for a reason; suppressing them hides real problems	Only use # noqa when you have a documented reason to keep the flagged code
No rule selection in config	Project uses ruff's defaults (only E4, E7, E9, and F rules) without expanding	Misses import sorting, modernization, common bugs, and simplification opportunities	Configure [tool.ruff.lint] select with the rules that match your project's standards
Try With AI​
Prompt 1: Decode a Ruff Error Code​
I ran ruff check on my Python project and got this error:

main.py:1:8: F401 [*] `os` imported but unused

Explain:
1. What does each part of this line mean? (file, line, column, code, message)
2. What is the F401 rule and why does it exist?
3. What does the [*] symbol mean?
4. If I wanted to see ALL pyflakes rules (not just F401), where would I look?
5. What is the difference between F rules (Pyflakes) and E rules (pycodestyle)?


What you're learning: How to read linter output as a diagnostic tool, not a wall of noise. Every part of a ruff warning carries information -- the file path, the exact location, the rule category, and the auto-fix status. Learning to parse this format lets you quickly triage warnings by severity and category, the same way a doctor reads lab results by knowing which numbers matter.

Prompt 2: Linting vs Formatting​
I am confused about the difference between ruff check and ruff format.

Here is a Python function:

def calculate_total(items,tax_rate):
    import math
    total=sum(items)
    result = total * (1+tax_rate)
    return result

If I run ruff check, what will it find?
If I run ruff format, what will it change?
Are there any issues that BOTH commands would address?

Explain the difference between a linting issue and a formatting issue
using this specific code. Then tell me: in what order should I run
these two commands, and why does the order matter?


What you're learning: The architectural distinction between finding problems (linting) and enforcing style (formatting). These are two separate concerns even though they are both about code quality. Understanding the difference lets you prioritize: linting errors might be real bugs; formatting changes are never bugs. Running them in the right order (check first, format second) means you fix logic problems before style problems.

Prompt 3: Generate Code, Then Lint It​
Write a Python function called `find_duplicates` that takes a list of
strings and returns only the strings that appear more than once.


After the AI responds, do not read the code looking for problems. Paste the AI's function into main.py (replacing the current contents) and run:

uv run ruff check .
uv run ruff format --check .


If ruff reports issues, do not fix them by hand yet. First, ask the AI: "Ruff found these issues in your code: [paste ruff output]. Why did you include these, and how should I fix them?" Compare the AI's explanation to what you learned about rule codes in this lesson. Then run uv run ruff check --fix . and uv run ruff format . to clean up.

What you're learning: This is the iterative cycle you will use throughout the course: generate code with AI, verify it with tools, ask AI to explain what the tools found, then fix and re-verify. You are not trusting the AI blindly, and you are not ignoring it either. The tools catch what reading alone cannot, and the AI helps you understand what the tools report. This three-way collaboration -- you, AI, and tools -- is how professional developers work.

Ruff and AI-Generated Code​

When Claude Code or any AI assistant generates Python, it optimizes for correctness, not cleanliness. It may import a module it considered using and then decided against. It may use a slightly inconsistent naming convention because it matched a training example rather than your project's style. It may leave a print() debugging statement it added while reasoning through the problem.

None of these are serious bugs. But left unchecked across dozens of AI-generated files, they accumulate into a codebase that is hard to read and harder to maintain. Ruff's job is to catch this category of problem automatically, before it reaches a commit. Think of ruff not as a tool for correcting your habits, but as the quality filter at the end of the AI generation pipeline. Your habit is simply to run it.

PRIMM-AI+ Practice: Ruff -- Your Code Quality Guardian​
Predict [AI-FREE]​

You already ran ruff on the main.py code from the Practical Application section above. Now look at the ruff output from Step 2 again -- without scrolling back. From memory, predict: how many issues did ruff check find? What rule code prefix did they use (F, E, I, or something else)? How many were auto-fixable with [*]? Write your answers and a confidence score from 1 to 5, then scroll back to check.

Run​

Now run ruff format --check . on the same file (after the --fix step from the Practical Application). Compare the output to what ruff check reported earlier. Record your result: which issues did check find that format does not catch, and vice versa? The key insight: check finds bugs and dead code (F rules). format fixes spacing and style. They catch different categories of problems.

Investigate​

Before asking your AI assistant, write a trace artifact: take the ruff output from Step 2 and, for each error line, write what you think the rule code means based on the rule prefix table in this lesson. For example, if you see F401, look up the F prefix in the table -- what category does it belong to?

Then ask your AI assistant:

Ruff reported: main.py:1:8: F401 [*] `os` imported but unused
What does each part mean: file, line, column, code, [*], message?
What is the F rule family? How is it different from E rules?


Compare the AI's explanation to your own notes. Now apply the Error Taxonomy from Chapter 42, Lesson 3: which of ruff's findings are structural problems (dead code that clutters the project) and which are cosmetic (style inconsistencies that do not affect behavior)? Write your classification before reading on.

Modify​

Go back to the "Try With AI" Prompt 3 above -- ask your AI assistant to generate a find_duplicates function. Paste the AI's code into main.py and run uv run ruff check . without reading the code first. Let the tool find the issues. Then ask the AI: "Ruff found these issues in your code: [paste output]. Why did you include these?" Compare the AI's explanation to the rule codes you learned. Fix with uv run ruff check --fix . then uv run ruff format . (run these as two separate commands -- ruff check --fix may report remaining unfixable issues, and you still want formatting to run). This is the core AI-era workflow: generate, verify with tools, ask AI to explain, fix.

Make​

Self-check: answer these without looking back at the lesson.

What is the exact command to run the linter on all files? Write it out. Then run it in your SmartNotes project to confirm.
What is the exact command to auto-fix safe issues, and what does "safe" mean here? Name one example of a safe fix and one example of an issue ruff flags but will not auto-fix.
What is the difference between ruff check and ruff format? If your answer distinguishes "bugs and violations" from "consistent style," you have it.
Given a ruff warning that starts with F401, what category does the F prefix indicate? Name at least two other prefix letters and their categories.
Operational Takeaways​

A linter finds problems that Python ignores. Unused libraries, forgotten values, style violations, and common bugs all slip past Python silently. Ruff catches them before they accumulate.

Linting and formatting are different concerns. ruff check finds bugs and violations (some are real problems). ruff format enforces consistent style (never a bug, always a readability improvement). Both matter, for different reasons.

Rule codes tell you exactly what ruff found. Every warning starts with a prefix: F for Pyflakes (unused code, undefined names), E for pycodestyle (style violations), I for isort (import order), and so on. The prefix is your first triage step.

--fix is conservative by design. Ruff auto-fixes problems where the fix is safe (removing unused imports) and flags problems where human judgment is needed (removing assignments that might be intentional). Trust the auto-fix; investigate what remains.

This is Axiom IX in practice. Ruff is not a suggestion. It is the first stage of an automated verification pipeline. Run it before every commit, and mechanical quality problems never reach code review.

VERIFICATION LADDER: RUNG 4 (PIPELINE STAGE 1)

Ruff is the first stage of your verification pipeline: lint before you type-check, type-check before you test, test before you commit. In Lesson 5, pyright adds Rung 2 (types). In Lesson 6, pytest adds Rung 3 (tests). By Lesson 7, you will chain all three into one command. Each rung catches problems the others miss.

Looking Ahead​

Ruff guards your code's style and structure. But there is a category of problems it cannot catch: type errors. An unused library is clutter. A wrong kind of data is a crash. When James passes a number where the code expects text, ruff will not say a word. Python will not complain either -- until the code fails while it is running.

In Lesson 5, pyright enters the picture. It reads your code without running it and tells you exactly where the types do not match -- before a single line executes.
