MCP Architecture Overview

Imagine you're building a Digital FTE that needs to help customers manage their work. It needs to read files from their computer, query their database, create issues in their project tracker, and pull documents from their knowledge base. Without a standard protocol, you'd build four separate integrations—each with its own authentication, data formats, and error handling. When you want your agent to work with ChatGPT instead of Claude? Rebuild all four integrations. A new customer uses Jira instead of GitHub? Build a fifth integration from scratch.

This is the integration problem that MCP solves.

Model Context Protocol (MCP) is the universal standard for connecting AI applications to external systems. Think of it as USB-C for AI—just as USB-C provides one port that works with chargers, monitors, and storage devices across all manufacturers, MCP provides one protocol that connects any AI application to any external service.

Before MCP (custom integrations):

┌─────────┐                     ┌─────────┐
│  App A  │──custom code──▶     │ GitHub  │
└─────────┘                     └─────────┘
┌─────────┐                     ┌─────────┐
│  App B  │──different code──▶  │ GitHub  │
└─────────┘                     └─────────┘

Same service, two integrations. Add App C? Write a third.


With MCP (one server, many clients):

┌─────────┐                     ┌─────────────────┐
│  App A  │───MCP───┐           │                 │
└─────────┘         │           │  GitHub MCP     │
                    ├──────────▶│  Server         │
┌─────────┐         │           │  (built once)   │
│  App B  │───MCP───┘           │                 │
└─────────┘                     └─────────────────┘

Same server serves both. Add App C? It just connects.


Released by Anthropic in November 2024, adopted by OpenAI in March 2025, and donated to the Linux Foundation's Agentic AI Foundation in December 2025, MCP has evolved from one company's solution to industry-wide infrastructure. When you understand MCP, you're not learning one vendor's approach—you're learning the protocol that's unifying the entire ecosystem.

Why MCP Exists: The Integration Explosion Problem​

Consider what happens when AI applications need to connect to external systems:

The Math Without Standards

AI Applications	External Systems	Custom Integrations Needed
3 applications	5 systems	3 × 5 = 15 integrations
5 applications	10 systems	5 × 10 = 50 integrations
10 applications	20 systems	10 × 20 = 200 integrations

Every new AI application multiplies the work. Every new external system multiplies it again. This is O(n × m) complexity—unsustainable for an ecosystem.

A Concrete Example: Your Customer's Tech Stack

You're selling a Digital FTE to a consulting firm. They need your agent to:

Read project files from their shared drive
Query client data from their PostgreSQL database
Create tasks in their Asana project tracker
Search documentation in their Confluence wiki

Without MCP, you build four custom integrations. Six months later, they switch from Asana to Monday.com. You rebuild that integration. A year later, they want to use your agent in Cursor instead of Claude Desktop. You rebuild all four integrations for the new host.

With MCP, you write zero custom integrations. You configure four MCP servers (filesystem, postgres, asana, confluence) that already exist. When they switch to Monday.com, you swap one server configuration. When they want Cursor support, it works automatically—Cursor already speaks MCP.

Without MCP (your code):           With MCP (community servers):
├── integrations/                  ├── mcp-config.json
│   ├── claude_filesystem.py       │   {
│   ├── claude_postgres.py         │     "filesystem": { "path": "/projects" },
│   ├── claude_asana.py            │     "postgres": { "connection": "..." },
│   ├── claude_confluence.py       │     "asana": { "token": "..." },
│   ├── cursor_filesystem.py       │     "confluence": { "url": "..." }
│   ├── cursor_postgres.py         │   }
│   ├── cursor_asana.py            └──
│   └── cursor_confluence.py
└── 8 files, 2000+ lines           1 file, 10 lines


The Math With MCP

AI Applications	MCP Servers	Total Components
3 applications	5 servers	3 + 5 = 8 components
5 applications	10 servers	5 + 10 = 15 components
10 applications	20 servers	10 + 20 = 30 components

MCP transforms O(n × m) into O(n + m). That's why the industry converged on it.

Bonus: SDK Tool Schema Unification​

Beyond the integration problem, MCP also standardizes tool schemas. In the previous SDK chapters, you saw each SDK uses different formats:

SDK	Schema Key for Parameters
OpenAI	function.parameters
Anthropic	input_schema
Google ADK	input

MCP provides ONE schema format (inputSchema) that works everywhere. But this is a secondary benefit—the real value is solving the integration explosion.

The Host-Client-Server Architecture​

MCP uses a clean three-tier architecture that you need to visualize clearly:

┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     MCP Host                             │
│  (Any AI application: IDE, chat app, API service)       │
│                                                          │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│  │         MCP Client                              │   │
│  │  (Manages server connections, tool routing)     │   │
│  └────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│               │ JSON-RPC 2.0 (stdio or HTTP/SSE)       │
│               │                                         │
└───────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┘
                │
                │ (Network or local pipe)
                │
        ┌───────▼────────┐
        │  MCP Server    │
        │  (Any external │
        │   service)     │
        └────────────────┘

Host: Where Humans Work​

The MCP Host is your application—Claude Code, Cursor IDE, VS Code, or your custom API service. It's where humans (or other agents) initiate requests.

Claude Code hosting MCP Client → Users request "connect GitHub"
VS Code hosting MCP Client → Developers want file search across codebase
Your API service hosting MCP Client → Backend needs database access

The Host doesn't directly implement tools. It delegates to the Client.

Client: The Connection Manager​

The MCP Client is a component INSIDE the Host that manages connections to servers. One Host can run one or more Clients, and each Client manages exactly one Server connection.

Important distinction: Not every Agent SDK needs multiple Clients. But every Agent that wants to use MCP needs at least one MCP Client—the lightweight component that speaks JSON-RPC 2.0 to MCP Servers.

The Client:

Discovers what a server offers (tools, resources, prompts)
Routes requests from Host to appropriate Server
Translates Host requests into JSON-RPC format
Deserializes Server responses back to Host format
Server: The Tool Provider​

The MCP Server is a standalone process (Python, Node.js, etc.) that exposes capabilities:

Tools: Executable functions with inputs and outputs
Resources: Files, database records, API data
Prompts: Template prompts that encode domain expertise

MCP Servers are typically simple services. A GitHub MCP Server provides tools for creating issues, fetching PRs, and managing workflows. A Database MCP Server provides tools for querying and updating records. A Filesystem Server provides tools for reading files, searching directories, and listing folders.

Each Server is stateless and decoupled from the Host.

Communication: JSON-RPC 2.0​

All MCP communication uses JSON-RPC 2.0—a simple protocol for calling functions remotely using JSON messages.

What is JSON-RPC? It's a way to say "call this function with these parameters" using a JSON object. The "RPC" stands for Remote Procedure Call—the client sends a message asking a remote server to execute a function, the server executes it locally, and sends back the result. The client never runs the code; it just receives the answer. The "2.0" is the version that adds features like batch requests and named parameters.

Why JSON-RPC? It's language-agnostic (works with Python, TypeScript, Go, anything), human-readable (easy to debug), and battle-tested (used by Ethereum, Discord, VS Code's Language Server Protocol, and thousands of other systems).

Every JSON-RPC message has:

jsonrpc: Always "2.0" (the version)
id: A number to match requests with responses
method: The function to call (for requests)
params: The function arguments (for requests)
result or error: The return value (for responses)

Example: Host wants to list files in a directory

Request (Host → Client → Server):

{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "resources/list",
  "params": {}
}


Response (Server → Client → Host):

{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "result": {
    "resources": [
      {
        "uri": "file:///path/to/file.py",
        "name": "file.py",
        "mimeType": "text/x-python"
      }
    ]
  }
}


JSON-RPC is simple because it has to work across incompatible systems. It's universal—whether your MCP Server runs locally (stdio transport) or remotely (HTTP/SSE), the protocol is identical.

The Three Primitives: What Servers Provide​

Every MCP Server exposes capabilities through three distinct types. This lesson provides an overview—upcoming lessons cover each primitive in depth.

1. Tools: Actions the Server Can Execute​

Tools are functions the Server implements. The Host sends a request; the Server executes and returns results.

Tool schema defines:

name: Unique identifier
description: What it does
inputSchema: JSON Schema for parameters

Example: GitHub Server provides a create_issue tool

{
  "name": "create_issue",
  "description": "Create a new GitHub issue",
  "inputSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "repo": {"type": "string"},
      "title": {"type": "string"},
      "body": {"type": "string"}
    }
  }
}

2. Resources: Data the Server Can Access​

Resources are read-only data exposed by the Server. The Host can list them and fetch their contents.

Resource examples:

A Filesystem Server provides resources for every file in a directory
A Database Server provides resources representing tables or query results
A GitHub Server provides resources for issues, PRs, code comments

You can't modify resources through MCP (that's what tools are for), but you can read them and search them.

3. Prompts: Templates Encoding Domain Expertise​

Prompts are pre-written instruction templates the Server provides. Instead of the Host writing prompts from scratch, it can request a Prompt template from the Server.

Example: A Code Review Server might provide a "security_review" prompt:

Review this code for security vulnerabilities.

Code:
[inserted by client]

Checklist:
- SQL injection points
- Authentication bypasses
- Data exposure risks


Rather than hardcoding this prompt in your Client, the Server provides it. If the Server's maintainers discover better security questions, they update the prompt once—and every Client using that Server immediately gets the improvement.

MCP in the Agent Stack: Where It Fits​

Previous chapters: You used SDKs to call tools directly

Your Code → SDK Client → Model.chat() → Tool Call → SDK Tool Handler → Response


This chapter onward (with MCP): You use SDKs to call MCP Servers

Your Code → SDK Client → Model.chat() → Tool Call → MCP Client → MCP Server → Response


MCP sits between the Agent and external services. The Agent doesn't know (or care) that it's using MCP—it just calls tools. The MCP Client translates those calls into MCP format, routes to the appropriate Server, and handles responses.

This is why MCP is powerful: Your agent code doesn't change. You add an MCP Client, point it to MCP Servers, and suddenly your agent has access to any service that provides an MCP Server.

Adoption: The Convergence Signal​

November 2024: Anthropic releases MCP publicly December 2024: Multiple MCP servers emerge (GitHub, filesystem, databases, Slack) March 2025: OpenAI officially adopts MCP in ChatGPT and Agents SDK June 2025: MCP 2025-06-18 release adds OAuth authorization and structured outputs September 2025: MCP Registry preview launched for server discovery December 2025: Anthropic donates MCP to the Agentic AI Foundation (AAIF) under Linux Foundation governance

The Agentic AI Foundation​

On December 9, 2025, MCP became a founding project of the Agentic AI Foundation (AAIF)—a Linux Foundation initiative co-founded by Anthropic, Block, and OpenAI, with support from Google, Microsoft, AWS, Cloudflare, and Bloomberg.

This matters because:

Vendor neutrality: MCP is no longer "Anthropic's protocol"—it's industry infrastructure
Competing companies cooperating: OpenAI (competitor) and Google (competitor) are now co-stewards
Enterprise confidence: Fortune 500 companies can adopt MCP knowing it won't be controlled by one vendor

MCP adoption by the numbers (December 2025):

10,000+ public MCP servers
97 million+ monthly SDK downloads (Python + TypeScript)
Adopted by ChatGPT, Cursor, Gemini, Microsoft Copilot, VS Code, and Claude

When direct competitors donate their standards to a neutral foundation and co-govern them together, you're not learning a framework—you're learning infrastructure.

Why This Matters for Digital FTE Production​

As you build Digital FTEs in later chapters, you'll need agents that interact with real systems:

Accessing your customer's codebase → MCP Filesystem Server
Querying customer databases → MCP Database Server
Creating tickets in their project management → MCP GitHub/Jira Server
Pulling documents from knowledge base → MCP Resource Server

MCP solves a critical problem: Your Digital FTE can't require customers to learn three different tool integration patterns. It needs to work the same way everywhere. MCP gives you that standardization.

In the next chapter, you'll build your own MCP Servers. In later chapters, you'll compose multiple servers to create integrated workflows. Understanding MCP architecture now is the foundation for that capability.

Try With AI​

Use Claude Code or your AI companion (ChatGPT, Gemini) for these exercises.

Prompt 1: Visualize the Architecture​

Setup: You're explaining MCP to a developer friend who's used only OpenAI SDK

What you're learning: Distinguishing between architectural layers (Host/Client/Server) and understanding how scaling to multiple capabilities requires multiple Servers, not multiple Clients per Server.

I've been using OpenAI's SDK for months, but I keep hearing about
MCP. Help me understand the architecture by answering these questions
about the system below:

System: I want my agent to create GitHub issues using MCP

- Where does the Host fit in?
- Where does the Client fit in?
- Where does the Server fit in?
- If I wanted to also add a filesystem MCP Server, would I need
  multiple Clients or multiple Servers?

Use a simple ASCII diagram showing how requests flow.

Prompt 2: Compare Integration Patterns​

Setup: Deciding whether to use MCP or implement custom integration

What you're learning: Recognizing when standardization creates value (reusability, multi-platform support) versus when custom integration is justified (one-off need, deep framework coupling).

I need my agent to access my company's Postgres database.

I could:
1. Implement direct database tools in my agent using the Anthropic SDK
2. Use an MCP Database Server

For each option, walk me through:
- How the agent requests data
- What happens if I want the same agent to work in ChatGPT
- What happens if another developer wants to reuse my database access
- Maintenance burden when the schema changes

Which approach scales better? When would you pick custom integration over MCP?

Prompt 3: Connect to Your Future Work​

Setup: Looking ahead to when you'll build MCP Servers

What you're learning: Understanding why MCP Servers are designed for reusability across multiple clients, not just your one agent. This prepares you for the implementation work ahead.

I'm learning MCP now, and I know the next chapter teaches me to build my own
MCP Servers. Imagine I'm building a "code analysis" MCP Server that:

- Provides tools for analyzing code quality
- Provides resources showing analysis results
- Provides prompts for common review scenarios

For this server, help me:
1. Define the JSON schema for 2-3 tools (code quality analysis, style checking)
2. Describe what resources this server would expose
3. Explain what domain expertise a prompt from this server would encode

How is this different from just writing these tools directly in my agent?

Safety Note​

As you work with MCP, remember: MCP Servers can expose sensitive data (database credentials, private files, API keys). Always review Server implementations carefully before connecting them to production agents. MCP provides the protocol—security depends on correct implementation.
